Dear friends:

We attended this Fifth Summit with the memory of that meeting of the Rio Group, in Santo Domingo, in March 2008, which was the precedent for the creation of this body.

This time, in the midst of a deep division between brother countries, we showed the world that we did not need to go to the OAS to resolve our differences. Three years later, we met in Caracas to found Celac, the great unity project of the Great Homeland.

Celac was born to give our peoples a strong and united voice before the international community. Ecuador has argued that the world of the future will be a world of blocks, and that the OAS should become the space for, like Celac, to process our conflicts and differences with North America.

Today in the retirement of presidents I have listened since we only have to discuss in the Celac summits our coincidences, not our differences, until these summits are not to make decisions.

The question then is, under those conditions, why do we presidents come? It would be enough to send a simple advisor.

If we don't have to process conflicts, why is Venezuela being taken to the OAS? Or should we discuss our conflicts, not in CELAC, but in Washington? I sincerely believe that this is unpresentable in our 21st century America. It is time to walk on our own two feet.

We can advance a lot this year on a transcendent agenda, with Venezuela in the Presidency of the Non-Aligned Group and Ecuador in that of the G77.

The world is constituted not in function of human beings, but of the empire of capital. We must find a better way to organize life on the planet, and the only way to achieve this is with the unity of our peoples.

We must take a clear position in defense of the world's migrants. The solution to stop migration is not walls or borders: it is solidarity, it is humanity, and creating conditions of well-being and peace for all the inhabitants of the planet.

Until a fair distribution of wealth is achieved, social and world problems will not be solved.

We have to seek the transformation of the United Nations System, so that it is the General Assembly that makes the great political decisions of humanity, and not the veto power of a small group of Security Council countries.

We must also seek a new way of managing science, technology and innovations. If there must be a good with a universal destiny, it is precisely knowledge.

The planetary ecological emergency demands binding agreements. But it is necessary to go further and carry out the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Nature, as well as create the International Court of Environmental Justice, which should sanction attacks against the rights of nature and establish obligations regarding ecological debt and consumption of environmental goods.

At the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Development, Habitat III, held in Quito-Ecuador last October, the New Urban Agenda was defined, reflecting a broad global consensus. Today we have the roadmap for urban development in the next 20 years.

It is also necessary for development to reform institutions such as the World Trade Organization. Believing that fair trade is one in which the playing field is leveled, that is, rich and poor, big and small, are treated equally, is a historical error.

The WTO also imposes restrictions on a country to regulate foreign investment, which, poorly managed, can destroy entire nations.
Thinking that the sooner and more free trade agreements are signed, the faster development will come, is something closer to faith than to science or history. To demonize protectionism, understood as the maintenance of adequate national policies to promote production, as well as the protection of children's industry and small producers, is to renounce the formula with which practically all countries have developed.

Nobody denies the need for trade, that is called autarky, not protectionism. The latter seeks an intelligent insertion in the world market, so as not to condemn us eternally to being primary export economies.

Nobody denies the market, but we must look for societies WITH a market, and not WITH a market, where lives, rights and society itself become just another commodity.

We cannot invest because we do not have productivity, and we do not have productivity because we cannot invest. It is the bottleneck that can be overcome with adequate financing for development. Trying to fix the Bretton Woods institutions, which have done so much damage to us, does not make sense for the countries of the South. We must build our own financial architecture, so that our savings stay in the region.

We must also seek a binding instrument to sanction transnational companies when they violate human and nature rights. Separated, the transnationals will impose the conditions on us; united, we will be the ones who will impose the conditions on transnational capital.

We must declare a frontal fight against tax havens, the extreme expression of capitalism without a face, without responsibility, without transparency, without a country. Nobody goes to them to make accounts transparent. Although evasion and avoidance affect all countries, the worst affected are poor nations and developing economies like ours.

Finally, we must make a radical commitment to democracy, understood as the government of the people for the people.

For a real democracy, equal opportunities and the notion of meritocracy must be essential. In fact, it is the difference between democracy and aristocracy. Still in our America, very few are born in a golden cradle and too many are born without a cradle. The great inequalities have created restricted or openly fictitious democracies, in which it seems that sovereignty lies with capital and not with the people.

We must avoid mercantile democracies, where the dominance of the entelechy of the market is such that even the quality of democracy is often measured by the quantity of the market.

We must avoid mediated democracies, where the media substitute the Rule of Law for the State of Opinion.

We must avoid “oenegized” democracies, where public policy makers are supposed representatives of civil society and international bureaucracies. There is nothing more dangerous for democracy than political actors without political responsibility.

A democracy also requires respect for human rights. However, the demonization of political power in Latin America, by pretending that only the State violates human rights and that the only source of corruption is the public sector, is one of the immobilization strategies to maintain the status quo.

The socioeconomic poor will not cease to be poor with charity, but with justice, and that implies the change in power relations within society. For this reason, it is necessary to capture political power so that the great majorities rule.

CLOSING
Dear friends and friends:

This is my last Celac summit. I will hand over the command of my country on May 24.

Ten years ago I found a Latin America destroyed by neoliberalism, and although much remains to be done, it has never been done as much as now.

We suffered the loss of great Latin Americans like Nestor, Hugo, and Fidel himself. Other historical leaders such as Lula, Dilma and Cristina suffer brutal harassment. There are clear attempts to stop the integration of our nations.

There may be setbacks, but Latin America will never go back to the past. Our peoples will not allow it.

Dear President Salvador Sánchez, I wish you every success. His Presidency in our beloved El Salvador, and now in CELAC, something unthinkable a few years ago for an ex-guerrilla, is the best example of the change of era in our America.

It has been an honor to work with you and for our peoples.

Ever onward to victory!