Madam President of the National Assembly and honorable assembly members
from Ecuador; Your Excellencies Heads of State of friendly countries
visit us on this day; high authorities of Ecuador; distinguished
special envoys and members of the Honorable Diplomatic Corps and
International organizations.
Dear María de Lourdes (Alcívar, First Lady); dear children, brothers
and family.
two
Greetings to the cabinet and to the friends who are with me today; a
I greet the Ecuadorian people on this glorious day.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Today we are May 24, 2021. Exactly one year from
bicentennial of the Battle of Pichincha, the last of several deeds that
consecrated the independence of our nation, and began
our journey to republican life. It's a day of remembrance
but above all, it is a day of renewal. Because the government that today
is born has before it the responsibility of leading us into a new century
of Ecuadorian republicanism.
Today we must examine whether throughout these two hundred years we have
been at the height of the republican ideals that saw us born. Yes
we have done honor to those patriots, who by dying on the slopes of the
Pichincha gave life to this country. Heroes who fought for ideas
illustrated as the rule of law, individual liberty, and
brotherhood between human beings.
I ask: does the country we receive today respond to the greatness of
that sacrifice? Especially in recent years, have you enjoyed
freedom in Ecuador? Have the law and the independence of
powers? Has equal opportunity reigned?
3
Ecuadorians know me as a man of action. Know that
I measure everything based on the results that reality shows.
Because only this reveals if we have had the courage to put into practice
that task entrusted to us by the founders of our State.
And reality clearly says no. We have not been up to the task.
Today we receive a country with historical levels of unemployment. A country
who has been dazzled by his inability to cope with a
brutal pandemic, but which countries in similar conditions faced
in a more orderly, efficient and - above all - free from corruption.
A country where the culprits fatten their pockets, while the
most innocent - newly born Ecuadorians - cannot even fill
their stomachs. Where the indicators of chronic child malnutrition
They are among the highest in the region.
A country with lacerating inequalities between the rural and urban world.
A country that has failed its youth in education and in creating
opportunities. That keeps in the most humiliating oblivion its
retired. Where being a woman is not only a disadvantage factor, but
existential danger.
Today, that we are at the gates of a new centenary of life
Republican, I invite you to ask yourself: why? Why do we live
this reality in Ecuador?
4
Why do we have such a rich land, but such poor citizens?
Why do we have such abundant natural resources, but
do we live in the midst of scarcity? Why having such a fertile soil,
our economy does not produce well-being for those who most
need?
The questions can be thousands. But the answer is only one and
always the same, and that is: our rulers have failed us.
They have not been able to measure up to the sacrifice of our people,
true working example. Nor have they been able to take advantage of
huge resources that nature has given us.
They have failed us, for the simple reason that they betrayed our
founding principles. In the midst of so much quarrel and intestinal struggle,
they gave in to the worst political weakness: authoritarian temptation.
They dedicated themselves to the obscene cult of the caudillo, that "Messiah" who
supposedly he knows everything: what is right and what is wrong; which
it suits us and what hurts us. An "enlightened" who acts and
think for everyone, that he has all the questions and also all the
answers.
They have never been able to accept that this country was born as a republic
democratic. And that her destiny is to live forever as one
Democratic Republic. But all that changes this May 24!
5
In this government that is born today, in this new century of republicanism,
that we are about to start, the era of caudillos ends.
The era of warlords is over!
Today we vindicate this glorious day, and begin the fight to
recover the democratic soul of our country. And that starts at
more basic things - and even obvious - but that we are obliged to
tell:
It begins by not accumulating more power in the figure of the president of the
republic. Because experience tells us that those who seek all the
power, then they end up seeking clemency for the crimes they
They occur when that power gets out of hand.
We will stay true to the strict margins that dictate
laws. We will have the humility, but above all the strength, to
say: I will be president and only president!
We will not chase anyone, we will not silence anyone. We will rule for
everybody. This means not governing in favor of a privileged sector. But
nor against anyone, have the opinion they have, do the
criticism they make.
Someone must say: this ends here! Even knowing the dangers
political that it entails. Even knowing that others would already be exhibiting
6
here, on this stage, a macabre list of enemies and persecuted
of the government.
Someone must have the courage to take the risk and break the cycle
vicious. And at this point in the story, that can only be done by this
new government! Therefore, so be it.
The political persecution in Ecuador is over!
I have not come to satisfy the hatred of the few, but I have come to satisfy the
hungry for many!
I will be the democratic head of a democratic state. Not my strength
will be born from how high I raise my voice to shout, but from how much I will listen to the
town before speaking.
Behind the ruins of the caudillo cult, a
democracy that uses the power limited by the laws, to do more
big dreams of all citizens.
A democracy where no one is singled out as "selling homelands" or
"Enemy of the fatherland." And whose only enemies are: disease,
illiteracy, malnutrition, gender violence. That's him
mandate of April 11 last.
Many ask me how we achieved that day the great
peaceful change, which has amazed the continent and - I dare to
7
say - also to the world. The answer is very simple. What happened
it was democracy itself.
After more than ten years of authoritarianism, aggression,
attempts to establish a perpetual regime, Ecuadorians
Let's assimilate the greatest democratic lesson: that there is no democracy
without citizen participation.
Today, citizens want to give, we want to contribute, without asking
nothing but the hope of making a better country.
We want our vote to mean: a fairer country with the
women, a country more responsible with nature, a country more
equitable with those most in need.
That all the politicians of this country get used to the fact that politics is
this: a fundamental desire of citizens, to contribute to the good
common, to the collective good!
May this democracy that we recover today be forever a
torrent, where people agglutinate their ideals, each one more admirable
and valuable than the other.
And may - together - these ideals serve to build a diverse country, in
where we will all have a place!
8
Thus, more than fourteen years later and on the threshold of a new century of
Republican life, in Ecuador we learned that there is only one answer
possible in the face of authoritarianism. And this is:
Democracy, democracy and more democracy!
Together we all decided to drown evil in the abundance of good. That
It is the way, Ecuadorians: the right way! We know that we do not
We are wrong, because developed democracies have not
wrong. Its great advances in economic well-being, in health,
in education, they show that they have not been wrong.
And as great as the pressure to replace our still weak
institutionality with the violence of the screams, we will not deviate or
one millimeter of the traced path. We won't give in, because that would be
do more damage.
That vicious cycle ends today. And today the road to Ecuador begins
of the meeting! We carry the spirit of the meeting in
name of our country: Ecuador.
We are a land where hemispheres, regions, climates and cultures come together.
We are the heirs of a meeting of civilizations, which changed
forever the course of humanity. We are depositories of knowledge
ancestral of this land, and that in time have merged with the
cultures that came from the Old World seeking freedom.
9
But all that history must turn into a more just future.
Ecuador must also mean a promise of balance in life
common; balance between the causes of its people; balance between
economic growth and social justice, two cornerstones that
they will be the foundations of a prosperous and equitable country.
A country where all children can cultivate their minds regardless
their conditions of origin. Where the youth will have freedom to
reflect, and seek the vocation that best develops their spirits, without
pressures, without fear of failure. Where material prosperity
also means cleaning our air, cleaning our
forests and the cleanliness of our seas.
And it is that the meeting is not an abstract concept. It is, above all, the
certain that the causes of this government will be the causes of the people,
of citizens: of all women, of young people, of
workers, of the workers.
That the will of the government will be the will of the people, moved by
the same goals and the same hopes.
More than a dream, they will be actions directed by an efficient State,
to eradicate hunger, disease, lack of education and the
abandonment.
10
Let there be no doubt: our intention is not to minimize the State, but
maximize your ability to serve the poorest!
Just over forty years ago, President Jaime Roldós Aguilera
He and he demanded of us: "The people want water, the people want water!"
Time has passed, various governments have come and gone. But the
problems remain.
The first point where we must find ourselves is in our rurality,
where our brothers in the country suffer even more from the scarcity of
services such as drinking water and sewerage.
Today, as we recall one more year of the premature departure of the president
Roldós, we make his words our own, we take up his promise: water,
water for the people. And not just water, but also infrastructure
essential such as: roads, lighting, schools and hospitals.
Another meeting point is to recognize that the fight for equality of
Gender is not just a women's issue. It's a problem
national. An Ecuadorian problem, which must be addressed by the
Ecuadorian government!
When unemployment affects women more than men. When
a woman earns less for the same work than a man,
produces an inequity that tears the social fabric, starting with
the families. And when an Ecuadorian woman is attacked, the wounds
eleven
we all suffer. She makes us a less free, less fair country,
and morally tainted.
Women's rights are human rights and we will put
all the necessary policies are in place to guarantee them!
Another meeting point is the eradication of hunger, especially
child malnutrition. This is - perhaps - the worst of inequalities,
because its consequences last over time, in the problems of
growth suffered by thousands of children who currently do not receive
adequate food.
Today's unforgivable inaction is costing us tomorrow. But
the time has come to act.
This country of encounter will equally protect all its children, whether they are born
where they are born!
The meeting is also built with the confidence that we are
generating in the world. After many years the planet returns to
set your eyes on Ecuador. Just when the news of
our choice, the country risk was reduced by more than 500 points.
Even before taking possession, one of the first tasks of
any government: create a positive atmosphere for work and
increase. But this renewed confidence must commit us to
all, especially those within Ecuador who have the
12
ability to undertake and create employment. From now on, we summon you
to start -without fear- the economic reactivation.
Here is the long-awaited opportunity! Show that, without harassment, without
persecutions, they are ready to put their resources at the service of the
Ecuadorian society. And not the country at the service of its resources.
Show your national commitment!
To paraphrase a few words from President Kennedy: While I eat
country we cannot help the poor, this government will not be able to help
the richest.
There is another meeting point that for too long has been
eluded, and lies beyond our borders. The last two
decades has been a time of wonderful technological change in the
world.
We are going through a fascinating era of invention that has become obsolete
various notions of the past. And while the modern world was
smaller, advancing in connectivity, in commerce and education
digital, in Ecuador they told us that we should lock ourselves up, that
we should make it more difficult for our talent to go out to compete in the
world.
But the reality is that no country can live in isolation. We are all
connected. In the same way that no human being can live without
13
be part of a family and a society, likewise a country cannot
turn your back on the family of nations that make up the world.
Isolation, confinement, only leads to decadence!
As a country, we cover a relatively small territory. But
talent of our people is infinite.
It's time for leadership with a big, big vision, like the
capabilities of its citizens!
Today Ecuador declares that it opens its doors to world trade!
We will seek to be present in the shortest possible time in the Alliance
of the Pacific, as a full partner country. We will open to
Ecuador to free trade agreements with our largest
allies. We will fully insert ourselves in the world to seek a
free and fair trade.
More Ecuador in the world and more world in Ecuador!
There are 7,400 million people in the world. There is the great
Ecuador's opportunity to sell Ecuadorian talent,
Ecuadorian products. And that world has infinitely savings
greater to invest in Ecuador, than we can have locally.
Here is the great opportunity: the world!
14
Let the world also know that we are committed to
main international consensus to achieve development
sustainable.
In 2015, the Declaration “Transform our world:
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ”, an agreement that coincides with
that all people need: health, education, housing,
jobs, energy, equality, peace and healthy ecosystems to live
worthily. The principle is to leave no one behind, which puts the
inclusion of citizens as the priority of our tasks.
All are goals that this government shares and actively
will boost.
Sustainable development starts from the eradication of poverty in all
its forms, the fight against inequality, the preservation of the planet,
sustained economic growth and the promotion of social inclusion.
We must include the marginalized of progress, the poorest of
among the poor.
Throughout my twelve years of political travel through Ecuador, I have
been able to meet many women. Some are teenage mothers;
others, mothers abandoned by their husbands, in charge of two, three
children, living on a dollar a day or playing bingo in the evenings, to
see if you win and eat, but most lose and don't eat.
fifteen
I made a commitment to one of them, I made a commitment to Lorenza,
who I told him: the day I come to power, you will be there, in my
heart, in my mind, in my soul. And it will be you and all the women of the
Ecuador the symbol of our struggle!
But I don't only know Lorenza. I know the women of the Katia neighborhood
of Machala !; to those women from the La Laguna neighborhood of Quevedo; of
Pescador, from Huaquillas; from the Guasmos, from La Trinitaria, from Nigeria,
of Cenepa ...
Amounts of women excluded from opportunities in Ecuador!
I couldn't stop mentioning them, I must be loyal to the citizens,
those who have trusted me and expect a real change in the
Ecuador.
To create opportunities for women we need to change the
orientation of public policies, in order to promote their inclusion
social, its development.
But, in general terms, for the entire Ecuadorian society
we must create public policies in order to control change
climate, build sustainable cities, change patterns of
consumption and protect our oceans.
The effects of the Covid-19 pandemic will mean decades of
delay in human development. It is urgent to take action to
16
reverse them. The 2030 Agenda is a roadmap that requires the
meeting of all humanity. This brings us perhaps to the most
critical in which we must find ourselves: our health.
We have difficult months ahead, which will test our
national determination!
Today, while we are at this ceremony, we cannot forget that
there are families suffering, Ecuadorians desperate to get a
bed in a hospital, Ecuadorians dying and others dying.
The country has to mobilize: ministries, public hospitals and
private, doctors, nurses, municipalities, parochial boards,
medical dispensaries, anyone who has the strength and
knowledge to give the vaccine or help someone else give it!
We have to mobilize!
The pandemic does not care about our economy, they do not care
our businesses or our jobs. But he doesn't care either
who stops it, be it a pharmacy, a private company or a hospital
public.
That is why we will respond from multiple fronts, bringing all of them together
our forces to maximize solutions that corner the virus.
17
It will be the largest logistics deployment in our history, to
fulfill the most sacred duty of a government: save the lives of its
citizens!
In undertaking this task we need to know that we are not alone.
We need the goodwill of the international community,
beyond political leanings!
We need to buy more vaccines, as many as possible! The
health has no ideologies or colors! This global evil needs a
global response!
The people of Ecuador and its government will know how to respond with gratitude,
with that gratitude that has always characterized us.
As of today, the plan that will have as its objective the
vaccination of nine million Ecuadorians in the first hundred
days of government!
The renewed Ministry of Health will have the direct support of the
vice president of the republic.
We will vaccinate without rest, because the virus does not rest. We will do it
seven days a week, in each province, in each town, in each
parish.
18
And we will also call for the help of the National Electoral Council.
What better opportunity, Madam President (Diana Atamaint), than in
non-electoral period the logistical capacity of the National Electoral Council
be made available to the Ecuadorian people, to regain health
from town!
And when those first hundred days have passed, we will continue
vaccinating until the task has been fully accomplished. Y
when the onslaught of the pandemic has subsided, and the
breathe greater tranquility in our country, then a
Even bigger task, the real challenge:
The fight to bring Ecuador, once and for all, along the paths
of prosperity!
This, dear Ecuadorians, is not a mere list of promises. No
ours will be a government that only promises. It will be a government that
it also commits us all.
As Ecuadorians, we share the same destiny. It is the obligation of
We all take on the challenges that the future imposes on us. Huge challenges that
They cannot be confronted in isolation, nor by the president of the
republic nor by this honorable National Assembly.
To realize the dream of a democratic government - of the people and
for the people - a democratic concurrence is necessary without
19
precedents. Regardless of the place we occupy, the role that
let us perform, let us act with the conviction that we all have
a contribution to offer to this irreversible path towards
full democracy.
We need the best of this government, of the citizens, of each
democratic party too, especially the parties here
together.
Here - before the eyes of our constituents - I appeal to the
national unity, which must be served civically. Because
Our loyalty goes beyond a few initials, it goes beyond the colors of
a match.
Our loyalty is above all, to the yellow, blue and red of Ecuador!
Obviously, that does not mean that I seek the obsequiousness of years
Recent Rather, what I expect from this Assembly is debate
passionate, but loyal. Vibrant, but constructive. Where prevail
always the search for truth and good for the people
Ecuadorian.
A debate that restores the prestige it has lost to politics. The
democracy is not the absence of differences and even conflicts. The
Democracy is the search for peaceful treatment and the right to
those differences.
twenty
This is how the Ecuador of the meeting should be, Madam President, honorable
Assembly members, all Ecuadorians.
Beyond my term as president, my desire as a democrat
is to witness the parliamentary recovery as the scene of the
popular sovereignty. The promise of full democracy requires us to
various State agencies - beginning with this Assembly -
Regain your lost skills.
Never again the concentration of functions in an organism
dependent on the will of a person! Never again a
poor organization in the fight against corruption!
However, until the people decide otherwise, I will respect the
current institutionality.
The novelist Jorge Icaza said that in Latin America there are no
interior monologues, but interior dialogues. He said it because
our identity is not complete yet. And this is because
Ecuadorian identity is born, grows, questions, reflects on itself
same, yesterday, today and until the sun goes down.
Because identity is not one, it is plural: it is about dialogues, about
encounters, disagreements and also reunions. Is to be in
constant learning together. Finding what we love about the other
and deliver to the other what he needs. The antagonistic exists and will exist.
twenty-one
And our challenge is to find the center, to reap an alliance
higher.
The difference is always enriching. Let's be different, but let's be
connected. They are not clashes, it is complementarity and mutual help.
It's minga, Madam President of the National Assembly.
These are words that drive me to meet my
fellow citizens, to summon members of civil society to
reactivate.
Listen to me well !: this is a call to the members of society
civil to reactivate, to fill each space, each cause with the goodness of
his actions.
In the last 42 years of our democracy, roles were awarded
protagonists to the State and the market. However, civil society does not
has never been located in the center of that triangle, even though it has
gestated projects of social agreements that the State has given few
listening samples.
My government will change that story!
Today, in this transmission of command, it should not be only the president
who takes on the challenge. We must all be together.
22
May all citizens feel that power returns to its true
owners, to you: the constituents, the citizens, the people
Ecuadorian, Ecuadorian civil society!
This government will encourage society, in all its manifestations,
to adopt cooperation initiatives in the development of their
State and its economy.
That is why I have allowed myself to invite to this ceremony a sample of
non-governmental organizations, which are not all
they should have been, but they do embody the will of this government to
reactivate those segments of society. Return to Ecuador
many NGOs that were harassed, threatened and
therefore they stopped acting in Ecuador.
In our country, dear Ecuadorians, there are opposite colors that
they become complementary. There are men and women
women; the past, the present and the future. The horizontal is interwoven
and the vertical, the heavenly and the earthly, the earth and the air, the water and the
fire.
A center where we all have our reason for being and nothing and nobody
surpasses! There is a center in which we find ourselves, and that is a
germ of democracy.
23
Beyond the photos and colors, the ballot, the spherographic, the long
rows and ballots, amphorae, percentages and statistics, winners
and losers. It is about dialogue on the same level. Is about
understand and understand the person across the street, from
build and not impose.
In this sense, I want to confirm once again that I will be the head of a
Secular state. I want to confirm once again that I will be the head of state of
a secular state. However, that does not imply a country where
denies our spiritual side. Nor does it prevent us from promoting a
great reconciliation between the State with all religions that in the
Ecuador coexist.
May our beliefs be bridges. That our convictions
nurture a deeper and more humane encounter.
I have allowed myself to invite the president of the
Ecuadorian Episcopal Conference, to the Presiding Bishop, to the Nuncio
Apostolic and also one of the most prominent pastors of the
Evangelical Church, to be witnesses to our declaration of
this interest of reconciliation between the State and the churches.
Believe it or not many young people, there was a time when politics
she had the power to excite, because decency still shone in her.
The following words of President Jaime still resound in me
Roldós Aguilera, I open the quote:
24
National independence and social progress have never been the fruit
of the isolated action of any government, but the result of the firmness
theoretical, political honesty, and the sacrificial perseverance of the entire
community. Fate is not made, it is carved every day: without hatred,
without revenge, without renunciations.
Together we must work to build a new historical time,
where the people not only retain their inalienable right to
self-determination, but also to exercise its leading role in
the exercise of an authentic democracy. I close the appointment.
I have never stopped believing in our power to change destiny.
One of my marks from a young age has been my total refusal to leave me
dominate by circumstance, or by what was supposed to be my
life. And that same conviction has brought me here, because the activity
Politics should also be a way to rebel against fate,
especially the one that some dark interests want to impose on us.
Let politics be the collective instrument to dominate the
adversity. That together we change this present to become
the destiny that we want, building that new time
history in which the Ecuadorian people will be, finally, the protagonist
free from its own history. That is our challenge.
I, as president, can only hope that my actions speak so
eloquent like the words of Roldós. May my decisions reflect
25
the thoughts of him, that my conscience responds to his ideals, and that
awaken in the young people the same civic fervor that sprouted in me ago
forty-some years ago.
Finally, I can't finish without thanking:
First to God, whom I ask for the wisdom to guide my country in this
way, where many before me were lost. May he grant me
prudence to always discern, between what is convenient and what is right,
between the fleeting and the eternal.
To my parents, whose legacy always reminds me that no matter how
How far you go, what matters is never forgetting where you started from.
I know that from heaven, from eternity, they are faithful witnesses of me
commitment to the Ecuadorian people. Many times i have heard
in my soul, in my heart, in my conscience, the words of my father
saying, "Son, you're on the right side of the story."
Thanks to my wife, María de Lourdes, the love of my life. We started
this trip forty years ago, undertaking the greatest company
of our life: our family, our children, our daughters-in-law,
our sons-in-law, our grandchildren.
Thanks to my children, because despite their youth, today more is what
I learn from them from what I can teach them.
26
But, first of all, thanks to the Ecuadorian people for trusting me.
Wonderful people, working people! The best town a
president can aspire!
To you, Ecuadorian people, I am united by the illusion that since I was a child
for this country, for his ability to get up and work.
I know, Ecuadorians, I know. I was never the most conventional candidate.
I am the first to be aware of my every flaw. And so
myself, I am the first to try to correct them day by day.
I also know how unlikely this day seemed to many, that in
At one point this all seemed like an impossible battle. But the
The truth is that this was partly due to the fact that for many years
our predecessors took it upon themselves to deface our
reputation and our life story.
And they did the same with many legislators who are in this
Chamber, as for example you, Madam President of the Assembly
National.
Who would have ever said that a former banker and a leader
indigenous people from the Amazon, would come to preside over the same
time these two functions of the state? Who could have said it!
Who would have even dared to mention it! However, here
we are both, madam president.
27
Here we are both, ready to serve and, most of all, eager for
work together for the good of the country. That is the awesome power that
it gives us democracy, to those of us who do believe in it.
The power to challenge the very notions of what can be
possible! The power not to conform to reality, but
mold it with our will! It is the power to achieve what, until
few weeks ago, no one would have dared to imagine. Well
well, it's time to dare.
Today is a concrete reality, which opens a new world of
possibilities and opportunities for our people.
Let's hug them! Let's take advantage of them!
Make this the moment we've all been looking for! The
moment when we were not wrong, the moment when
we really change!
This is not a mistake, this is not ungovernability. This is, on the contrary,
an invitation to continue discovering ourselves, to continue on a path
new, open before us, ready to be explored. A path that
others, clinging to fear and division, did not even dare to tread.
This is to conquer new territories of peace, coexistence and
prosperity. It is venturing to a new destination, a new
28
weather. Shake off the rocks of the past and - by doing so - dare
to be another country.
Here and now, from this very moment, from this very
instant, madam president of the National Assembly, honorable
Assembly members, all Ecuadorians!
This is achieving the unimaginable! This is making history! Let's dare
Ecuadorians, to change!
Finally, invoking once more the words of Roldós, I conclude
this message: My power in the Constitution and my heart in the people
Ecuadorian!
Long live a republican Ecuador, forever, forever!
May God bless us all!
Thanks a lot!
A hug to all Ecuadorians, a hug to all those present
in this ceremony!
Thanks a lot!