Dear colleagues from our America and the
whole world:
INTRODUCTION.
As you may have observed, in the Government of the
Citizen Revolution the usual order of
vocatives has been reversed and we
we lead first of all, to the
sovereign: the peoples of the
world, of our America and, particularly
two
in our case, the people of Ecuador. Plus
Still, while less authority and
representation has a citizen of
world, the more important it will be to our
revolution.
They are the constituents, the owners of
our countries, the owners of our
democracies, while we dear
fellow leaders, we are just the
first servers. Hence the logic of
revolutionary vocatives, reflecting the
changes we seek in the structures of
can.
II. THE ELECTORAL VICTORY.
3
A warm greeting to each and everyone
Presidents and Heads of State whose authority,
like mine, it is not a personal attribute, but
the consequence of a mandate that makes us
responsible to those who gave it to us
with your vote.
Last April 26 in this sister land
the bargain of offers did not triumph, the
technicalities, the list of works and projects,
more of the same, more of the worst. Which
triumphed again was a dream, the dream of a
New Homeland. It was the struggle of a whole people,
from the town of the Coast, of the Sierra, of the
Amazonia, the insular region, and that
fifth region always delayed, that of the
migrants. Ecuador voted for itself.
Thank God they were able to steal everything from us, except
the hope. We will never disappoint that
mandate received, and we will put everything
our effort and capabilities, without
surrender, without cowardice many times
disguised as prudence; clearly and
front, without the stereotypes of statesmen that
they want to impose our oligarchies on us.
4
We are celebrating because the country is
reborn from the mercantile chaos; has been
snatched from the privatizing trinket. TO
our Ecuadorian sisters and brothers
we tell you today, with the greatest fervor and
greater humility: we have succeeded thanks to
your commitment to the Homeland, because
the only thing we long for and the reason for our
struggle is that country of equity, of equality of
opportunities, no racism, free of
illiteracy, a country where roads
serve to convey equity and not regrets,
a country whose hospitals, schools, colleges and
universities are not scenarios of the
social and economic discrimination, but true
centers of dignity and collective development.
However, we need to understand
that the popular victory has been nothing more than the
first step of a revolutionary process,
whose objective is the construction of a
inclusive, supportive and equitable society.
We seek good living, sumak
kausay, equitable development, well-being
common, freedom based on justice,
peace.
5
Precisamente para alcanzar estos objetivos a
plenitud, era necesario alcanzar el poder
político, para transformarlo en poder popular,
el único capaz de cambiar las estructuras de
oprobio que aún prevalecen en nuestra región.
Que nadie se engañe ni caiga en veleidades:
el verdadero desarrollo solo es posible con un
cambio en la relación de fuerzas dentro de la
sociedad. Si esto es cierto en cualquier parte
del mundo, lo es mucho más en la región más
inequitativa del planeta, la cual
lastimosamente es y ha sido ya por
demasiado tiempo nuestra
América.
Hermanas, hermanos ecuatorianos: Lo que
hemos hecho juntos, es imposible. Antes de
nuestro gobierno, ninguno de los tres últimos
gobiernos electos había acabado su período, al
ser derrocados por los ciudadanos por
traicionar el mandato popular; en diez años
habíamos tenido nada menos que siete
presidentes; se nos acusaba por ello de
ingobernables, cuando tan solo éramos objeto
de traición. El pasado 26 de Abril, no obstante
6
haber estado en medio de la mayor crisis del
capitalismo planetario de los últimos setenta
años; no obstante del ataque feroz del poder
informativo, económico, social y hasta
religioso; no obstante haber estado todos los
demás candidatos contra nosotros; no
obstante a que los vencedores de la primera
vuelta electoral ganaban con un promedio de
apenas el 25% de la votación; viene este
pueblo rebelde y nos da una victoria en una
sola vuelta, algo absolutamente inédito en la
historia contemporánea de nuestro país.
Lo que hemos hecho es imposible, y
demuestra que la revolución ciudadana es
irreversible, y nada ni nadie la podrá detener.
III. BICENTENARIO
Ecuador también está de fiesta porque hoy
celebramos el Bicentenario del primer grito de
libertad en América. Fue la revolución del 10
de agosto de 1809 una revolución que se
propuso alcanzar la meta soñada de la
libertad. La historia recoge a algunos actores
de este gesta, normalmente vinculados a las
clases acomodadas del Quito de ese entonces,
pero fueron muchos los que protagonizaron
7
esta lucha libertaria, muchos los que regaron
su sangre sobre las piedras el 2 de Agosto de
1810, muchos los que acompañaron después,
a través de los llanos y las alturas andinas, la
épica marcha de Bolívar.
Durante todo este tiempo, y aún antes, desde
la insurgencia de los Barrios de Quito y las
memorables rebeliones indígenas del siglo
XVIII, junto a los criollos se encontraron los
mestizos, los indios, el cholerío numeroso; los
artesanos que pasaban en vela para preparar
la vitualla y los pertrechos de improvisados
ejércitos, las mujeres que cosían sus
vestuarios; las guarichas, sobre todo las
inolvidables yaguerridas guarichas, que
acompañaban a sus soldados alo largo de
todas las campañas, alimentándoles con amor
y alentándoles con su esperanza, cuidando las
heridas y poniendo comida para que la fuerza
libertaria no se pierda.
Tenemos que herir de muerte al olvido: desde
el 10 de Agosto de 1809 hasta el 24 de Mayo
de 1822 ocurrió, ante todo, una gesta
popular, una gesta de gente enamorada de su
tierra tanto como de su ansiada libertad, una
8
gesta que siempre luciría incompleta si junto a
los grandes próceres, a los estrategas, a los
políticos visionarios, aunados en una misma
voluntad, no estuvieran los pueblos de todas
las regiones de esta Patria grande que es la
Patria Americana.
Tuvo que transcurrir un siglo desde el 10 de
Agosto de 1809, para que se buscara que
aquella libertad política alcanzada por los
patriotas de la primera hora, fuera libertad
real para todos.
Esa fue la concepción extraordinaria del Viejo
Luchador, Don Eloy Alfaro Delgado, general de
hombres libres. Aunque invocó las mismas
ideas liberales que animaron a los caudillos de
la Independencia, la revolución que promovió
y llevó a la victoria fue sobrepasándolas en su
realización histórica. Por eso, la obra
visionaria de Alfaro no pudo menos que
chocar con los intereses del capital bajo su
forma conservadora y santurrona, pero
también bajo su forma liberal–mercantilista,
cuyos defensores se encontraban fuertemente
vinculados a los intereses de la propiedad
terrateniente, el comercio y sobre todo la
9
banca, y así el Viejo Luchador se convirtió en
un precursor de las nobles causas de la
transformación social, la hermandad
latinoamericana y el socialismo, al entender
que, sin justicia, lo que algunas ideologías
entienden por libertad es lo más parecido a la
opresión.
Of our first patriots, of the Espejo
and the Mejías, of the Olmedo and Rocafuerte, of
the Montúfar and Morales, the Salinas and
Quiroga, from the Riofrío, Villalobos, Manuela
Cañizares, we pick up the flag of the
sovereignty and self-determination that they
bravely they raised with their writings,
with his oratory, with the first government of
August 1809.
From Alfaro, we claim the slogan of a
country freed from ecclesiastical ties, from
ignorance and obscurantism; formed by
men and women endowed with a conscience
enriched by the benefits of knowledge and
incorporated into an America of solidarity,
responsible for a country that saw itself
itself large and integrated.
10
Of the great struggles of our own
time, we take the example of the peoples
who resist for equality, against the
discrimination, against all forms of
exclusion, against the powers that be who have
captured and asphyxiated the state to benefit
privileged minorities; we take the
example of the people of Martí, of the people of
Sandino, from Morazán, from our towns
ancestral, of our peoples
African Americans and all the peoples of the
planet who have decided for life; that
they have chosen peace; who have opted for the
solidarity.
We are Bolivarians and Alfaristas, but
also Martianos, Sandinistas, Morazanos.
With authentic revolutions, with the awakening
of our peoples, the heroes recover the
gift of speech, regain command,
fertile quality of libertarian captains.
IV.- THE AXES OF THE REVOLUTION
The Old Fighter said something we believe
must be invoked now, at this time in the
eleven
that the Citizen Revolution is made flesh in
every Ecuadorian: when a town
wake up, every word is a hope,
every step is a victory.
Today, it is precisely about that. The village
has awakened, we speak hopefully
we walk victorious. In the first stage of
the citizen revolution we proposed five axes
of action. The first of them, the Revolution
Constitutional. We said on January 15,
2007 that the political institution had
collapsed, sometimes by design
anachronistic and outdated, others by the clutches of
corruption and political voracity. And by
this we promote, from day one, the
National Constituent Assembly, the same
who, overcoming all absurd opposition, achieved
the almost absolute support of Ecuadorians and
Ecuadorians. The paradox of the case was that,
who from the past of disgrace
opposed his convocation, were the
first to sign up to participate in the
herself, like wolves disguised as lambs,
but they were defeated by the decision
majority of the patriots. In the end, that
National Constituent Assembly in which
12
we had a large majority, approved the new
Constitution, that song to life that today
protects and protects Civil Rights and
Ecuadorian Human Rights and
Ecuadorians. But let's not forget, let's not stop
may collective amnesia serve the
Forever predators, let's remember how
the same as always wanted to deceive us
by saying it was a confiscating constitution,
that eliminated freedom of worship, that
violated moral principles of the
Ecuadorian people, among many others
silly stuff.
Now we all know: none of that was
truth. Happily, despite all these fallacies
boosted many times by a press
corrupt, our new Constitution is already
a reality, and the foundation stone of
change of epoch, of this new time of the
Homeland.
Now, we are freeing ourselves from defects, from
bad practices on the political scene;
They believe that we have no memory, that we do not
we agreed on how Congress worked
when it was the business meeting of the
13
Partidocracia, board where the loot was raffled
of the State: oil,
telecommunications, taxes, where are
distributed the control and regulation bodies and
they put them at the service of minuscule and
powerful oligarchic groups.
Even the language changes, in a
surprising double standard. When they had the
hegemony the usual ones, those who agree
the powers that be should keep winning
the elections, the "good" relations between the
Congress and the Presidency was called
governance. Now coordinated work
between the Assembly and the Executive it turns out that
is, for mediocracy, the "subordination of the
Legislative to the Executive ”.
Dear companions and companions
Assembly members: We are confident that the
National Assembly will be an instrument
invaluable and positive to achieve the
changes that our society is demanding
peremptorily. The serious, the
really serious, it would be that the interests
unspeakable privileged minorities
provoke actions designed to obstruct the
14
path of transformation, justice and
Liberty. I hope they remember what he said himself
President Kennedy: “When the
step towards peaceful changes, it is
promoting violence, since history
cannot be stopped, and changes will have to
arrive by one means or another ”.
Our country, our people, do not resist anymore
the disgraceful inequality we have inherited
From the past. For this reason, all the deep homeland
has begun to shake, to unmask the
discrimination, exclusion and violence
underhanded and everyday against the poor. We have
declared before the world our will
unshakable to put an end to injustice.
This is a new time, let's keep
I live what has been achieved, we will hold this
giant awakening, sublime, building
inch by inch this road to a life
dignified.
Colleagues, colleagues:
The second line of action, the Fight against
fifteen
Corruption, has been and is a practice
permanent and even obsessive of our
government. The only case of corruption in the
high spheres was investigated and denounced by
ourselves; and, therefore, we enjoy the
credibility of the people. But, corruption does not
it is only in the unscrupulous handling of
public funds, is also rooted in
the wicked and selfish model that spawned the
neoliberalism, through privatizations,
dishonest indebtedness and looting
institutionalized, such as permission to
steal that gave corrupt bankers the
Constitution of 1998, approved precisely
by those who today try to sabotage the
Revolution.
The citizenship, the Ecuadorian people, knows
that the five fingers of one are not equal
hand, know that we all have to spend a
bitter drink, sometime, by actions u
omissions of dear, close, familiar people.
In the government of the citizen's revolution
the political will of
punish abuses, corruption, even
indelicacy, regardless of who
16
the kite and the personal pain that
it can cause us. Our greatest loyalty
it will always be with our consciences. Are
people with clean hands and deep ethics. In
the Ecuador of today and tomorrow there will be no more
impunity.
The end of those dire times began
with the sanctions on corrupt bankers,
with the seizures that no one - except
us- dared to do. Under the new
Constitution, another way is over
widespread corruption: collusion between
informational power and financial power. OR
bankers, or journalists, never both again
things.
So gentlemen, bankers, media owners,
choose what business you do today in
ahead. We also said that services
audiences would improve to make the
desired transparency. There we have the Service
Internal Revenue, the Civil Registry, the CAE,
electronic public procurement, the system
of information for governance -
SIGOB-, the financial information system
–SIGEF-, technology and information put to the
17
Ecuadorian service. In addition, for
us accountability is something
sacred. Therefore, every Saturday, throughout
more than two years, and from all corners
of the Homeland, we have exercised our right and
our duty to inform our people.
A thousand thanks to all who welcomed us with
open arms, from Macará to San
Gabriel, from Santa Elena to Guamote,
from Gualaquiza to San Lorenzo, and so on,
each one of those beautiful corners of the
Homeland. A fervent hug to your people, warm,
hospitable, generous, to your gastronomy, your
landscape, his kindness and his affection.
The third axis of action was that of the Revolution
Economic, to break, and forever, with
the external mandates, with that perverse
Washington Consensus, with systems
that only generated more misery and
inequality, which clumsily destroyed the
foundations of every society and every
economics: human talent, denying them
our citizens to education and
health, and social cohesion, by excluding from
benefits of progress to the big
majorities.
18
We have prioritized a dignified policy and
sovereign who has not sought the ingenuity of
liberate markets, but liberate the human being
of fallacies and national interests and
internationals who prostrated him during
decades.
One of the most relevant characteristics of
21st century socialism, a doctrine to which
adheres to the citizens' revolution, it is
precisely the supremacy of the human being
on capital. For us the human being
it is not just another factor of production, but the end
production itself. What we found
in this sense it was truly
terrifying: the human being turned into a
more instrument of capital accumulation.
There is no doubt that one of the main
victims of the long sad neoliberal night
it was the working class.
Today, among many other things, Ecuador is
a country free of labor outsourcing. Equal
form, the
salaries of teachers, workers
paid from home, artisans, strength,
19
police and military, etc., and for the first time in the
history the prices of the
utilities: dignity fee, ICE
of phone calls, internet cost
and local, national and
international, school enrollment,
school uniforms and books, outpatient consultation
hospitals, free medicines, plus
keep frozen the cost of
fuels, gas, transportation, etc.
However, much more is lacking in this regard.
In the radicalization of our revolution,
we will seek to overcome the mean concept of
minimum wages, perversely understood
as fair wages. Minimum wages are
precisely that: minimums to avoid a
greater evil, which is unemployment, but nobody
it may occur to you that a salary that is not
can even cover the needs of
a family to leave the threshold of
poverty, can be considered a fair wage.
The goal will then be to ensure that none
company is considered profitable until
achieve for each of its workers
a truly living wage.
twenty
Here is a call to our brothers from
Latin America and particularly UNASUR:
competition is already a beginning enough
questioned among economic agents, but
a true absurdity between countries. No
we can fall back into the trap of
compete with each other to attract
investments or sell more to the markets of the
first world, precarizing our strength
labor. Who were the beneficiaries? The
rich countries, with cheaper products to
cost of the sacrifice of our workers.
Both between our countries and within
of them, instead of so much
competition, we must give more space to
collective action, for example to harmonize
our labor policies and not sacrifice
our workers at the altar of the market.
That is precisely another characteristic of the
new economic system and socialism of the
21st century: rescuing the relevance of action
collective for development. Versus
collective problems, we must give answers
collective.
twenty-one
Therefore, the importance of the role of the State,
institutionalized representation of the
society, through which the company performs
said collective action. Pretend to minimize the
role of the State, was one of the great
absurdities of the long and sad neoliberal night,
as well as trying to maximize it, it was one of
the blunders of statist socialism.
What is unquestionable is the need for a state
efficient and based on the common good, for
which must be released from the kidnapping of
ruling classes. We have worked
hard for it. This has undoubtedly been the
I work harder and less visible, but
probably the most important: the
profound reform of the Ecuadorian State. The
the road traveled is immense, since
we really found a state
deliberately torn apart and distributed which
booty among pirates. Today we have in the State
Central planning, sectoral organization and
regional, adequate management models,
administrative rationality, rescue of
public companies, and a long etcetera. Without
However, there is still much to do,
22
within it, perhaps the most difficult thing: the change
mentality of a certain bureaucracy that follows
with their anachronistic codes, depending on the
dominant classes and paradigms, and not in
role of the Ecuadorian people and their
diversity. Proof of this are the invitations
sent for this event, where it is requested
dark suit for men and tailored suit
for the women. This may be a detail
irrelevant to some, but to me it is
extremely significant and a sample
how much we still have to do.
I want to apologize to the peoples
ancestral for that barbarity, since
what those absurdities say
invitations, they couldn't be here with their
traditional costumes; I want to apologize to the
poor of my country, our reason for being,
because if we paid attention to that absurdity, no
they could be here unless they have
borrowed the happy suit; I want to ask you
apologies to all citizens of the country,
because despite the fact that our Constitution
defined as a plurinational state and
pluricultural, and our National Plan for
Desarrollo talks about respecting that diversity in
23
unity, to the shame of the revolution
citizen we still have bureaucrats who
try to impose stereotypes on us and
most ridiculous snobberies. I insist, for me this
fact is very telling of all that we lack
to do.
The government of the citizen's revolution believes
firmly in the productive force of all and
all entrepreneurs, not just those who know
they spew their representation in cameras that
use the discourse of the market and the
competition, but every time they
they should break the principles for them
themselves invoked. This government believes in
capacity of thousands of producers
associative, cooperative, community,
autonomous, of which contemptuously the
neoliberalism calls the informal, but the
that we call them the subjects of the
social and solidarity economy that recognizes
our New Constitution, the producers
of the immense and fruitful sphere of the economy
popular.
In these months of government, we had to
face the greatest crisis of global capitalism
24
of the last eighty years. This crisis we
hit triple: in addition to the
effects that all countries suffered, that is,
loss of export markets and
decrease in financing and investments;
Ecuador also faced the collapse of
migrant remittances and the prices of
oil, the two sources of foreign exchange
supported the dollarization of the economy.
Despite this, with ability and creativity
we knew how to face the hurricane, and today we can
say that the worst is over, without having
never sacrificed the social sector and support for
the poorest. What's more, Ecuador is very
it will probably be one of the few countries
of Latin America that will grow this year, and
currently shows one of the rates of
lowest unemployment rates in the region.
Let's continue down the road of driving
worthy and intelligent of the debt problem
external. With courage and skill, for the first
once in history the country managed to defeat the
financial speculators, bought 91%
of its external commercial debt in bonds 2012
and 2030 with discounts of about 70%, which
which means a saving of more than 300
25
million dollars annually during the
next twenty years, money that will serve now
not for the pockets of creditors, but
for national development.
One day, you can hardly believe that there was a
monumental scam process that had
been able to surround himself with a halo of respectability, of
"technical" secrecy; that nobody, during
decades, I would have been able to uncover this
cricket pot; What legions of technocrats
sell homelands, have been able to live and profit from
story of the debt, against his people;
that the assault has reached such levels of
perfection and institutionalization; that the
countries have continued to request money
to pay interest on money owed,
perversion only comparable to the concerting of
Indians, that unusual infamy of the feudal system
colonial that forced to assume the debts
"For up to two lives" and that he survived for
good part of the republic.
Development is not a balance sheet of
Profit and loss. There are many things with
immense value but no price. Of dignity
peoples also live. Therefore, this
26
government has never allowed bureaucracy
international someone come to impose their
policies, and was even expelled from the country at the
representative of the World Bank for the
blackmails that that bureaucracy intended
impose on the country.
Finally, in the essence of the change of the
economic system, is the overcoming
alleged theories that even claimed to be
the end of the story. The collapse of a system
based on greed is not only self-evident, but
that implies the own destruction of the being
human, having tried to raise the
selfishness as the highest individual virtue and
Social.
We proposed in the fourth line of action the
Revolution in Social Policies. To the
contrary to the patronage policy of the
neoliberal governments, the Revolution
Ciudadana opted for inclusion policies
they have understood, not a legion of
desperate spectators, practice
permanent government of the oligarchy,
27
but the partners of a responsible country, a country
of caring human beings.
The programs in Health, Education, Housing,
Social Inclusion, unprecedented in history
contemporary, are living testimony of a
participatory democratic exercise. From the
Millennium schools, the thousands of games
new for teachers, exemplary service and
expansion of the same in hospitals
public, the spectacular program of
housing, where we have built more
housing solutions that all
governments of the history of Ecuador together,
are just some examples of what
mean, in reality, equity and
democracy. This has allowed, after
years of a trend to the contrary, decrease
in the country the gap between rich and poor and
continue the trend in terms of
decrease in poverty and destitution.
I would like, as always, to mention in the form
special to our migrants, those
exiled from poverty, expelled from their
own land, they had to open horizons and
spaces in other latitudes. Let's not forget
28
never to those responsible for that exodus, today
all together and revolted against the Revolution
Citizen We said, so
responsible, that migrants are not
illegal, what exists are illegal practices and
aberrant, such as racism, xenophobia and
coyoterism; but, behind everything is the
irresponsibility and insensitivity of
governments that never cared about the
fate of his compatriots, surely
because the vast majority were poor and
marginalized.
We have advanced in the Return Plan, we have
started to build the way back from
our compatriots, but what is more,
we have dignified the migrant brothers,
not just defending them, as we did in
countless times they were raped
your rights in any latitude of the planet,
but in the conquest, through the new
Constitution, of a worthy representation in
the Constituent Assembly and now in the
National Assembly.
Migrant Brothers: This Companion
29
President never forgets or will forget that
During the long sad neoliberal night
while freezing public investment and
depressed social investment to the extreme
not to replace or burned lamps in
operating rooms, Ecuador was maintained by
the poor, for the humble, for those who
they never received in their own country or
even the right to work, but never the
they forgot, and they did not stop sending their remittances
from the outside, they didn't stop loving the
Country, nor to impregnate it with his efforts, with
your hope. To our brothers
migrants, thank you very much, this is your
government.
Our work in social policy has
understood a new prison regime,
with dignity and true conditions of
rehabilitation, and we will continue to deepen
that transformation. In fact, here are things
really beautiful. We were the first
government in the history of Ecuador in
remember in the opening speech to the
citizens in prisons, private with or without
reason for their freedom, but that they could never
30
be deprived of their dignity as beings
humans.
We denounce the disproportion and injustice of
the drug law, which does not even differentiate
between consumer, carrier -the calls
"Mules" -, and the real drug traffickers.
That is why we said that our prisons
they were filled not necessarily with
delinquents, but of single mothers, fathers
unemployed, impoverished workers,
than looking for a better future for them and their
families, made the mistake of lending themselves to
transport drug. With the National Assembly
Constituent we gave an amnesty to all
these condemned by poverty, and the
spectacular result is that of 2221
amnestied, we only have 19 recidivism, it is
that is, only 0.86%, with which it was ratified
our conviction that these compatriots
they were not criminals, but just poor.
We continue to provide our greatest support to
Ecuadorian youth, today vindicated in their
constitutional rights, to the point that
been integrated to participate in the
elections, because you cannot continue with
31
slogans that became fetishes, such as
say that youth is the future of the country,
while being kept marginalized from all
decision. We are with the young, ours
it is a youth government, not necessarily
in chronological age, but yes in heart,
because being young, as Montalvo sentenced,
is to be revolutionary and germ of
transformations.
We will continue with our youth, because the
Homeland requires that talent and effort
new, so many times misunderstood, be it in the
arts, in the hubbub and in the celebration, because
our revolution is optimistic, joyful, and not
tragic or martial. We have even been branded as
troubadour left, and we are glad of it.
A song does not make a revolution, but the
inspires, because it inspires joy. This is one
joyful revolution, we do it day by day,
singing. Let's leave the bitterness to those who know
they feel powerless to beat us at the polls.
We know that there are no cultures without memories,
that there is no development without peoples
32
excited about their identities. Because,
now, we inaugurate a country consolidated in
cultural policies that favor dialogue
among the diverse, intellectual creation and
artistic. For us, culture is not a
decorative fact, it is a social good. And not
we will spare no effort on this
road.
The fifth line of action of our revolution
was the rescue of dignity, sovereignty and
search for Latin American integration.
In this sense, the Citizen Revolution
will continue to work on strengthening the
multilateralism and integration spaces
Latin Americans, especially with the
sister countries of UNASUR and ALBA. From
In the same way, we will continue working without
disdain in other multilateral spaces
strictly from our regional context,
where Ecuador has already raised its head,
assuming a leading role against
ignominies of the planet, as was ours
leadership in the 39th Session of the Assembly
General of the OAS, in order to repeal the
shameful resolution 662 that excluded the
33
brother people of Cuba of happiness
organization in 1962.
During our tenure, I make my
commitment that this government will continue
betting on bilateral relations
sovereign, based on dialogue,
cooperation and development of agendas
positive with all the countries of the world,
as today we are demonstrating it in
bilateral agendas with countries like Peru,
Chile, the United States and other countries
brothers of the continent, as long as
these relationships are based on respect
mutual respect and respect for our sovereignty.
We make a commitment to strengthen the
South-South relations, and in this sense from the
"Middle of the World" we are establishing
diplomatic and commercial relations with
countries that before our country ignored by the
vassalage of our rulers and for having
the gaze only fixed on the North. In
this sense guides the openings of
new embassies in strategic countries in
Africa, the Middle East and Asia, essential for
establish relations with other countries of the South,
3. 4
as well as to insert ourselves intelligently and
sovereignly on the planet.
She did not shake our hand when denouncing
structures of international submission that
are at the service of transnationals and
the Bretton Woods financial institutions,
how has been the complaint that recently
we made of ICSID. Nor does our
hand to denounce the Bilateral Treaties
Investment, another ignominy exerted on
our nation that only benefits the
foreign interests. In this world of
madness, although it seems implausible the capital
has more rights than human beings, and
any transnational can take to a country
sovereign to arbitration, without even having to
exhaust the internal legal instances.
Our bet in international politics is
clear, and is based on relationships
foreign affairs and diplomacy based on dialogue,
promoting the rights of
Ecuadorians anywhere in the world, and
in international solidarity with the peoples
oppressed, and in this sense I want to do
express mention of our brother people
from Honduras. Our consequence
35
revolutionary is inalienable in the
solidarity with the brother people of
Honduras, our demand that the
usurpers of people's power be
defenestrated and tried, that all
national and international instances,
regional and global stand up haughty
so that never, under any circumstances,
sully the democratic will of a whole
town. To you,
President Zelaya, our embrace of solidarity and
fraternal. In the same way, in this ours
second independence, our homeland, my
the government and I, we'll stand tall and
sovereign in our commercial relations
with other countries, making a clear bet
by Trade Agreements for Development
fair and caring, maintaining our
firmness and clarity of speech when it comes to
say "No to Free Trade Agreements"
that the great powers of the North have
tried to impose us with the complicity of
our corrupt oligarchies for years.
It is with that sense of justice, sovereignty and
creativity, where initiatives can be framed
36
of this government such as the Yasuní-ITT project,
for which we continue to bet and with which
we intend to set a precedent that can
change history. It is through these
initiatives, where the Citizen Revolution and
Our country shows that we prioritize
social and environmental values, exploring
other ways to economically benefit the
country.
Today, as we celebrate the Bicentennial of the First
Independence, we bet once more on
that Bolivarian footprint, which has resulted in
the unrestricted defense of our sovereignty,
as we demonstrated in the invasion and
criminal bombing of Angostura; as what
we demonstrate with our performance in the
Grupo de Río, in Santo Domingo; as what
We demonstrate with the patriotic surveillance of
our northern border before any
intervention of irregular forces; as what
We demonstrate, in particular, with the process of
integration that Ecuador has carried out
through the creation of the
UNASUR and Banco del Sur.
37
We fly all the libertarian flags of
our America, because only one is the Homeland
American.
V.- COLOMBIA
A few days ago, the last foreign soldier
that was in our territory
returned to his country, and we had the satisfaction of
announce to Ecuadorians that in this way
we had regained territorial sovereignty
that in a moment of surrender was
mutilated in favor of another government, whose ends
they are not necessarily the ones that are trumpeted
in public.
Today, however, we are attending the
setting up another scenario, once
the Government of Colombia has announced that
finds negotiating delivery, no longer
one, but seven bases for the operation of the
United States Army.
Hopefully the installation of military bases in
Colombian territory, do not propose to strengthen
the warmongering policy of the Government of our
38
neighbor, and fight, not drug trafficking, but
the insurgent governments of our America.
We are now told that it is a problem
strictly Colombian. How much double
moral! Why is the same not said of the
nuclear programs of countries
consider hostile to certain centers of
can?
Simply because there those threatened are
them, while in this case, the
threatened we are only Latin Americans.
The installation of bases or use of the already
existing by foreign forces in
our region, it is a fact that affects all
the continent. Therefore, aware of our
responsibility for maintaining the
peace, and ratifying our decision not to
get involved in the endless conflict
internal to Colombia, we clearly raise
our voice of protest over this situation.
The free men of Latin America,
We will defeat the busy messengers of the
imperialism.
39
Meanwhile, there is a new onslaught
international media for this time
make us pass as hostile towards Colombia.
How much hypocrisy. Has the world
forgotten the 7 years of bombing with
glyphosate on the northern border, trampling
any sense of good neighborliness? Is that
we already forgot the bombing of the 1st. From
March 2008, attacking everything
international right? Do we forget that
while Colombia has barely 3,000
men something near its southern border,
having the second largest army of
Latin America, we have close to
10,000? Has the world forgotten the
tens of millions of dollars we spend
for taking care of a border that Colombia
deliberately neglected? Is that
we have forgotten the tens of thousands of
Colombian refugees and displaced persons who
does Ecuador host?
We do not expect palms for that, but
not so much ingratitude and cynicism. Is that the
world has forgotten our soldiers, policemen
and civilians killed, mutilated, wounded, by a
40
war that is not ours? Well then we
we have not forgotten them. That the whole world
understand: guerrilla problems,
paramilitarism, drug trafficking, crops
of coca, inability to control
national territory, narcopolitics,
parapolitics, they are not in Ecuador, they are in
Colombia.
Unfortunately the amorality of the
world powers do not seek the truth, but
just geopolitical games where the
obsequious try to make them heroes
and those who reject vassalage try to
become villains. I assure you that
accept military bases in the country or
get involved in Plan Colombia, tomorrow
himself would go from being the friend of the FARC to
to be a distinguished statesman and democrat. But
that will never happen. I prefer the risk of
to be free to the nefarious solvency of the servile.
THE PRESS
Colleagues, colleagues:
Let's not be fooled: we have beaten
who have held the power to exercise it
41
for the privileged, but not for power
in itself. There are still powers that be.
Above all that terrible power, which is power
informative.
The companies that control the media
communication have believed that by the simple
circumstance of doing so, they already have the quality
moral to become census takers of all
the steps, and even the intentions of the
Government.
Thus they intend to win the moral battle,
deprive our actions of legitimacy,
minimize the transformative sense of
our policies, devalue our
efforts.
I fully agree with those who argue
that the validity of democracy requires means
free, independent and
critics.
But, one thing is the existence of means
endowed with these characteristics and, another, very
different, the impersonation of public opinion
for private interests and even whims
42
of these companies. While a press
free and independent is vital to a
democracy, the irresponsible press and
a prisoner of her own interests is nefarious
for that same democracy.
The greatest adversary we have had in
these 31 months of government has been a
press with a clear political role although without
no democratic legitimacy. They
they state that we are against the press
review. They are wrong: we are against
mediocre and corrupt press.
They used to deny that this kind of
press, as well as bad journalists. I know
they placed above good and evil. Now
It turns out that there can be bad press and
bad journalists, but they are all in the
public media.
We must lose fear, and at the country level
consider ways to control excesses
from the press. In developed countries, never
they would dare to do what they do here
mansalva: lie, lie and lie. There is a
contradiction in its own nature:
private businesses supplying a good
43
public: social communication. Which is the
alternative? I don't know, maybe the situation
current is the lesser evil, but recognize
that would already be a huge advance:
demystify the press, take it off the pedestal
of infallibility and moral supremacy that she
herself has built, and recognize the
private businesses dedicated to information
as precisely that: businesses that
submit the public interest to the private when
the first is against the interest of your
business.
TRANSITION
On this great date in America, when everything
the continent celebrates the constitution of the first
sovereign government of the mestizo homeland,
we have concluded the first stage of our
Citizen revolution, and we have concluded it
in peace, amid the majority approval
of our people, whose sagacity is always
greater than that of the brainy political scientists of
chance.
Great is the experience we have acquired
in these two and a half years of work. We have
44
already savored bitterness and disappointments
that always brings power, and we are no longer so
naive as on January 15, 2007. From
In the same way, we have received hard blows from the
destination.
The strongest of them, without a doubt, just 9 days
after the start of the government, the loss of
the prime minister of defense in history
of the country, our dear companion
Guadalupe Larriva, her young daughter Claudia and 5
brave Ecuadorian soldiers. Never
we will forget.
We know that our convictions are
they found from the beginning on the route
correct, and that the management of the State is not a
simple matter of goodwill, nor is it reduced
to the application of an abstract knowledge,
nor does it depend on simple political skill.
When I see people who have given all their
life to these struggles, debating in the
loneliness of their own strength, I can't
stop feeling enormous admiration; but
I have already learned that the lonely fight for
of specific individuals, without changes in the
Four. Five
structures of power, although it is worthy of
those who carry it out, does not attack the causes that
make possible the existence of injustices and
inequalities.
I mean, comrades, that the fight that
we must carry out, the campaign that we are going to
continue in the next four years, no
it is only intended to relieve pain
individual, but to extirpate the causes of
pain; is not directed exclusively at
to help the poor, but to extirpate for
always the structural causes that make
poverty possible; not proposed
simply punish the corrupt, but
remove the conditions that make the
corruption.
It's a gigantic fight, I know. And
also that the final goal will not be
achieved in the short span of four years.
But it is a fight that we have already started, and
that no one is going to stop her. Ours is
Revolution of the oppressed. Of those who
were silenced and saddened by elites
perverse. It is the revolution of the marginalized
46
lifelong. Of the indigenous, of the Afro
Ecuadorians, bakers and
teachers; of students who yearn for a
future and a place in history; of the
peasants, cholos, chazos and montubios who
They know that the land is for those who work it;
of the alfarista potters from any corner
from the country; of paid female workers
household, who demand no minimum wages,
but of dignity; to housewives, for
centuries ignored despite their sacrifice and
family devotion; of those who never had
protection and social security; of the artists and
patriotic intellectuals, professionals
vehemently dedicated to science and
technology; of those who have consecrated themselves to
make thought a trench of
solidarity that banishes selfishness, in
definitive, of those who are the engine of
history: human beings, who never
they will once again be victims of the machinery
neoliberal and savage capitalism.
THANKS
Allow me at this time to thank
those to whom I owe so much. TO
47
those militants and leaders of Alianza País,
hundreds of thousands of hands and hearts
anonymous who have built victory after
victory and who selflessly work
for the New Homeland. You guys are
the indispensable soldiers of the revolution
citizen. Of you, companions, is this
triumph.
Thanks to the companions, friends of the
Presidential office, Palace and residence
of Carondelet. To those loyal soldiers and
policemen who with such dedication give us
day-to-day security, many of them already
true friends, because they are the people
with which we share practically all
daily vicissitudes. They are faithful witnesses
of our dedication for the Homeland, and as well as
we had to go through very hard times
and ungrateful, they have also been able to feel with
we the love and the hope of a whole
town, which allows to overcome any
obstacle and fatigue.
As the motto of the grenadiers of
Tarqui, show loyalty at every moment
until the sacrifice.
48
To my work team, to those ministers,
secretaries of state, senior officials who
tirelessly they work day by day for Ecuador
that we dream. You who know my many
abysses and my few golden peaks,
Thank you very much for your friendship, delivery,
loyalty, companionship. To their families,
infinite thanks for supporting this mission
that the town has entrusted to us
Ecuadorian.
Anyway remember that priorities
are clear and should not neglect their loved ones
dear. If ever for that passion for
Homeland I demand too much and I don't realize
that, do not hesitate to let me see it.
To that colleague and friend Lenín Moreno,
Vice President of the Republic, synonymous with
loyalty and solidarity. Thank you Lenin, for giving
both an example of courage and bravery, with a
mixture of love and joy that before
I thought it impossible to meet you.
To my mother, who before with her sacrifice and
now with her prayers she takes care of me day by day.
49
And of course, thanks to you. Anne, Sofia,
Ninike, Miguelito. I have the best children and
wife that life can give. I know these
years have been unfair and extremely
hard for you, and I have no right to do
that.
I will always carry deep within me
soul, dear Anne, your madness for having left
parents, siblings, friends, to come to a
unknown country that with time also
you have made yours, just for love, and I know well that
these years I have been practically absent.
Things are going to change, I know that the people
Ecuadorian will understand.
CALL TO UNITY
Finally we reiterate our willingness to
dialogue with everyone around the country. With the people of
clean hands, burning hearts and minds
lucid for the country, it will always be
infinitely more what unites us than what
separate us. However, we will not give up
before factual powers or the impositions of
fifty
forever. With us, through dialogue all,
by force, nothing. Here we are willing
to risk our lives for change.
We know well that we are the government of all
and of all Ecuadorians, but nobody
you have the slightest doubt that our options
preferential are for the poor, the young
and our ancestral peoples.
EPILOGUE
It is our vocation to meet the Old
Fighter Don Eloy Alfaro, and in any
corner of the country repeat, until recording in the
conscience and in the heart, his words: Nothing
for us, everything for the country, for him
people who have made themselves worthy of being free.
In closing, I would just like to quote the
beautiful preamble to our constitution, and
may this be our final message to the world:
We and we, the sovereign people of the
Ecuador, recognizing our roots
millennial, forged by women and men
of different towns, celebrating nature,
51
the Pacha Mama, of which we are part and that
it is vital to our existence; invoking the
name of God and acknowledging our
various forms of religiosity and
spirituality; appealing to the wisdom of
all the cultures that enrich us like
society; as heirs of the struggles
social liberation from all
forms of domination and colonialism; and with
a deep commitment to the present and the
future, we decided to build a new way
of citizen coexistence, in diversity and
harmony with nature, to achieve the
good living, the sumak kawsay; a society
that respects in all its dimensions, the
dignity of individuals and communities;
a democratic country, committed to
Latin American integration - Bolívar's dream
and Alfaro-, peace and solidarity with all
peoples of the earth.
For the homeland, sacred land
Ever onward to victory!