Colleagues, colleagues.
Dear young people, I want you to know that I believe that this is not just a time of change, we are living a true change of time, a new time, a time of hope for Latin America. We are witnessing the political, economic and social defeat of neoliberalism, represented by the misnamed “Washington Consensus”, in which, paradoxically, we Latin Americans did not participate, and it was called “consensus”; One of the biggest crises in Latin America has been the crisis of our own thinking, we did not even dare to think, we thoughtlessly followed policies that were generated in the north and that was called “consensus”; "Consensus" reached behind the back to the interests of the vast majority and for the benefit of small economic and political sectors.
The beginning of the end of neoliberalism is evident in a deep crisis. In the last quarter of 2008, production, trade, and housing and stock prices suddenly plummeted. In the first quarter of 2009, the production of the European Union as a whole fell by 10%; Japan's by 12%. The bubble burst in large part due to the collapse of the subprime mortgage market in the United States, which in a matter of days involved German, Japanese and many other banks, which had invested in the housing sector and that were doomed in many cases to bankruptcy.
These home loan packages were nothing more than bad debt - money loaned to clients without the ability to pay for dilapidated houses. But on Wall Street thousands of such debts were bundled together in multibillion-dollar bundles, then resold on the London or Tokyo stock exchanges. Many profited from it. To disguise their origin, they gave them "serious" names such as "Structured Investment Vehicles" (the famous SIVs), which sounds better than "Bad Debt Packages". The famous Bear Sterns bank had two bundles of debt with really fancy names. One was called the "High Grade Structured Credit Strategies Fund" and the other the "High Grade Structured Credit Enhanced Leverage Fund." In the end, however, neither the pretty name, nor the obscene injection of $ 3.2 billion into one of the debt packages, could save him.
As is often the case in these cases, fear spread and infected the entire international financial system. Capital suddenly withdrew in on itself. Instead of speculative euphoria, speculative hysteria was unleashed. The crisis deepened.
The countries of the South, whose role in the international division of labor is to produce raw materials for the markets of the North, also became nervous. We are concerned about the extent of the drop in demand from the United States and the risk that it will hit our productive sectors. The shaking certainly came. In Ecuador, the crisis hit us threefold, in addition to the effects of all the countries in the world, that is: greater difficulty in placing our products abroad, and greater difficulty in accessing sources of financing, also It produced a drastic reduction in remittances sent by migrants and the price of oil, our main export product, plummeted.
You know that after a terrible crisis, the result of these models, to assume that the banks were going to regulate themselves, that the market worked per se, that it did not need control of the society in which it operates, and that society is represented by of the State ...
In 99 we had, perhaps, the greatest crisis in the history of Ecuador and it is very easy to show that behind that crisis was the political power of financial groups, basically the bankers, to the point that a transitory one was put into the Constitution which was approved in 98 allowing the Central Bank to give stabilization credits to the banks, when that was prohibited several years before by law and in the Constitution itself, but as a miraculous premonition they put that transitory one, because they knew that the crisis was coming. Everything was prepared so that the Ecuadorian people would pay for the crisis and not the bankers.
Instead of concluding that the country had to be freed from the power of these bankers, from the power of these groups that exert pressure on the decision of Ecuador's public policies, it was concluded that Ecuadorians did not know how to handle monetary policy and the national currency was eliminated.
When They have a dollarized system, as Ecuador does, a system that makes them lose competitiveness, requires foreign exchange earnings not subject to competitiveness; That is why the Argentine convertibility exploded, because it lost competitiveness; It did not have these incomes not subject to competitiveness and the real sector began to balance and accumulate large imbalances in the external sector.
In Ecuador, the real sector is deteriorating, but we have how to finance, even in the external sector, by two sources of income not subject to competitiveness: oil prices (general oil income) and migrant remittances, because with the pain of the soul I can say that even before our government, the only thing that Ecuador had been successful in was exporting, it was exporting Ecuadorians […]
There is no greater prudence than knowing how to invest and naive saving is, perhaps, the most serious of recklessness.
Due to the prudence of not having invested in Ecuador, today we have to import even electrical energy; Our fields are flooded because we don't have flood control projects, so always remember this (especially the kids who are studying economics); There is no greater prudence than knowing how to invest […].
In Ecuador we have known how to invest and that has been the engine of the economy; We do not believe in the exclusivity of the State as the engine of the economy, but in countries like Ecuador, the largest generator of foreign currency is called the State with oil exports; and the biggest saver is also called the State […]
This situation was achieved thanks to countercyclical measures of continuous public investment and the application of redistributive social and economic policies.
Despite the great crisis of 2009, poverty did not increase, poverty due to unsatisfied needs- and 2007-2008 you managed to reduce it by a very important amount; Of course, in Ecuador anyone is an economic analyst and they have done studies that say that poverty has increased, that is false. The INEC, with our serious, honest investigations; They show that poverty has not increased despite the crisis, due to these social policies and redistributive policies.
There has even been an increase in purchasing power, a reduction in extreme poverty according to satisfied basic needs and a reduction in economic inequality.
As a general rule, Latin America survived the 2008 crisis much better than the effects of the 1997-1999 Asian crisis. In Ecuador that crisis at the end of the century, at the height of neoliberalism, had dramatic consequences, since it broke our entire financial system. But it was chronic of an announced bankruptcy, everything was prepared so that the banks fail and the State pays. The matter was so blatant that on November 30, 98, a law approved by Congress on deposit guarantee was published in the official registry - you know that deposit guarantee is a way to support the financial system, as long as it is do well, up to a certain percentage and up to a certain amount, that is, as in the United States, up to deposits of 100,000 dollars and up to 80% of those deposits, that is, the maximum that can be returned is 80,000 dollars, that way achieves joint responsibility of banks and depositors, to know where the silver is deposited.
Well, the AGD law in Ecuador, imposed by the bankers, covered 100% of the deposits and free of charge, so, if you put 10 million in a doubtful bank, the State had to return 10 million, then it was a good incentive to fail the banks, and the banks failed and it was the state that paid. All of this was a chronicle of an announced robbery.
The banks, one after the other, collapsed, and their owners, the irresponsible bankers, fled the country taking with them vast resources and leaving multimillion-dollar debts with the State unpaid. The government of that time decreed a bank holiday, the champions of property rights made the largest seizure in the history of the country by freezing, for a year, the deposits of all citizens to save the banking system and, overnight to In the morning, Ecuadorians ran out of their savings, which constituted one of the greatest national tragedies in our republican history. One of the most disastrous consequences of this 1998-1999 crisis was the massive migration of millions of Ecuadorians in less than five years.
We all paid for this crisis, especially to citizens, but to the State as well, it cost us about 6,000 million dollars, which, at that time, corresponded to about 30% of GDP, which makes it one of the largest crises in the world. the history of Latin America.
And how did citizens pay for the crisis? When our deposits were seized in March 1999, the exchange rate was 10,000 sucres to the dollar; A year later, when they begin to return the deposits, the economy already dollarized, they begin to return it at 25,000 sucres per dollar, that is, if you had a million sucres in March 1999, you had 100 dollars in deposits; when they returned 25,000 sucres to the dollar, they only returned 40 dollars; They stole 60 dollars (60%) of their deposits, a net transfer from all citizens to the banks, in addition to the aid that the State gave directly.
It's funny, in Latin America and in Ecuador there is always talk of populism, of the subsidy -those who give subsidies to the poor is a bad word-; The biggest subsidies that have been given in Ecuador have always been to the rich: the sucretization of 1983 in private foreign debt, the bank bailout of 1999 (the one that is said salvage, but was called in Ecuador with the word "bailout).
In Latin America, then, many countries were hit harder by that terrible crisis of the late 1990s, than by the one that is now hitting the world.
It is not a coincidence that those most affected by the 2008 crisis are the ones most dependent on the US market; those who signed Free Trade Agreements and I also heard that yesterday, with all due respect: "that there is no protectionism." Why not? If all the developed countries of the world have practiced adequate protectionism; In Ecuador we are in a process called Selective Import Substitution, but there is no country in the world - perhaps with 2 exceptions (Switzerland and the Netherlands) - that have developed without adequate protectionism. Those who are economists know the history of the economy, they know the strategy of import substitution, protection of the children's industry that was applied in Latin America until the 70s, especially, promoted by the Economic Commission for Latin America.
Well, that was not even originally from Latin America, it is said that it was John Lits, a German economist, who proposed in the 19th century the concept of children's industry, which is an industry that gains experience, economy on scale, etc., it must be adequately protected; but in truth John Lits learned this concept from Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of State of the United States; that is, the initiator of modern protectionism is called: United States of America; and it has been one of the most protectionist countries in the world with England, etc. What happens is that when they are the champions of competitiveness and they are sure to win with free trade, they do preach there what they never practiced.
But it is not necessary to demonize words of concepts: a well applied protectionism –protecting the children's industry, handicrafts, etc.- can be the key to development. In fact, we have imposed heavy tariffs on Chinese products and there has been a very important recovery in our textile industry, our leather industry, our ceramic industry, which, above all, are small industries and that has generated thousands of jobs.
That they do not convince us with certain criteria that by dint of repeating themselves they believe that in repetition is the demonstration, such as, for example, that free trade always benefits everyone; that is unsustainable from a theoretical, empirical, historical point of view, etc. And the countries that most proclaim that are the countries that when they leave the agreement the most have protected their economies.
The Mexican GDP fell by –7.3% in 2009, he bet everything on the NAF. And how the opposition of our countries is so intellectually dishonest (I know this may sound undemocratic to you: talking so harshly about the opposition) and is that the opposition that exists in Uruguay has nothing to do with the opposition that exists in Ecuador . For the opponents of Ecuador, the objective is to destabilize the government, it is not to enrich the debate and improve public policies with a different point of view, then, that opposition tells the Ecuadorian people every day that: “The supposed recession (Ecuador does not it had a recession, but we grew little –only 1% -) it is the fault of the terrible economic policies applied in Ecuador ”, that is, there was no world economic crisis; But the evidence is overwhelming, the countries that best faced the crisis are the countries with heterodox economic policies: Bolivia, Peru (which has had neoliberal policies, but faced the crisis with heterodox policies), Ecuador and Uruguay itself, Uruguay did not reduce the public investment despite the crisis. And the countries that fared the worst are the countries that insisted on orthodox and neoliberal policies like Mexico. Central America was hit hard by the construction collapse in the United States.
But those of us who decided to diversify our economy and to emphasize a more endogenous vision of development, we have been less affected. Brazil, for example, which has a huge domestic market, has managed to escape the worst effects of the crisis. Similarly, in the rest of the South, in Africa and Asia, the countries least integrated into the world market have emerged relatively unscathed in terms of their production. The emerging countries with greater weight have known how to be more cautious and protect their production and are already showing signs of recovery.
Countercyclical measures ... And this contradicts orthodox macroeconomics, because this is saving and saving regardless of the situation of the economy, and that is a mistake - I insist - that is, prudence is a virtue, but there is no greater prudence than know how to invest, and you can save when there are no urgent needs, but what would you think - it is a simple but representative example - of the mother of a family who does not take her sick child to the doctor for virtue of saving, or that of the businessman who Does not change the machine that was damaged by virtue of saving ?, the same at the country level.
The counter-cyclical measures of China and India seem to have overcome the slump of 2009. For 2010 it is estimated that China will grow again by 9% and India by 6.5%.
In industrial countries, on the contrary, the crisis has been much more devastating. Among the advanced capitalist countries, the hardest hit have been those that form the core of speculative economies, particularly the United States and Great Britain, whose economies depend heavily on disproportionately large financial sectors. Other countries such as Spain, Iceland, Greece and Ireland, where credit and property bubbles had also been allowed to flourish, were also hit hard. In the United States and the Eurozone, official unemployment hovers around 10%. In Spain it is almost 20%.
There is, of course, a gradual recovery in the industrial economies. The massive bailouts by central banks and the Federal Reserve, involving trillions of dollars, succeeded in injecting liquidity into financial systems. But recovery will be slow if this opportunity is not taken to profoundly change the system and economies remain prone to increasingly frequent and destabilizing crises in the future.
For this reason, it is necessary for us to ask ourselves: what is it that has entered into crisis? We consider that what is crumbling is a form of immoral accumulation, in which there was no place for ethics, which dehumanized life, mortgaged hope and plunged the planet into misery and environmental devastation.
This is not a temporary or just financial crisis, the evidence shows that it is a systemic crisis of the accumulation regime, the result of the gradual weakening of the state, and its regulatory capacity of the economy, that is, the result of the subjection of societies to the entelequia called market, before the market subjected to societies.
This systemic crisis began in the early 1970s, it entered in its bankruptcy phase with the crisis of the Asian economies in 1997-1999 and headed towards greater precariousness with the recession caused by the crisis of high-tech companies of 2000-2001 and the financial crisis of 2008.
(Sorry, the crisis did not start in 1970, the deepened accumulation model began: we are talking about neoliberalism and the wild capitalist production model without state control.)
During the last decades, irresponsibly gave way to unbridled speculation in financial markets, and to visions of the economy that make abstraction of the productive forces and the needs of an adequate production of wealth, an economy based on the large capital, especially financial capital, where the human being was just one more instrument of accumulation
For a time, from the point of view of big capital interests, this strategy was successful. After the Cold War, the hegemony of neoliberalism became universal and practically all the ruling parties of the overwhelming majority of the countries of the world adhered to its project. Many times the term "globalization" served to name this global consensus, which affirmed that the orthodox policies of laissez faire and of a decline in the role of the State in economic regulation, were the most appropriate from the point of view of macroeconomics and economic growth. more solvent from the point of view of microeconomic management. It was a historical error and the prelude to the current resounding failure.
In this sense, it is important to point out that the world establishment does not seem to have understood how necessary and urgent it is to give way to a true paradigm shift, to a new economic system that entails new rules of the game, to prevent further crises from hitting us. serious in the future.
Many still think that the economy was essentially healthy; that the problems are limited to the financial sector. For this reason they have limited themselves to offering liquidity injection solutions to the system without changing its fundamental structure. Trillions of dollars of the money of the citizens of various countries have been spent to bail out the banks, implement austere budgetary policies and revive credit bubbles that, within a few years, will burst again. And all this has been justified in the name of a supposed apolitical “technique”, trying to impose the validity of an option that has ignored a fundamental principle: that everything that is related to social life is political by nature, even the denial of the politics.
And this is another of the tragicomic, ridiculous features of the supposed modern economy: denying the politics of the economy, when politics was born as political economy; and economic policy is precisely politics, options, value judgments, technically decided; but the decisions are political. And now they want to deny the political dimension of economic policy, fiscal policy, monetary policy ... From there atrocities were derived as autonomous central banks: they could not be contaminated by political leaders, these technocrats were above good and evil, they were Pristine, they were technical, that is, they managed to technically execute, with technical purism, monetary policy.
Well, with that criterion, if we are consistent, let us also make the finance and finance ministries autonomous, because fiscal policy is also technical. That does not withstand the slightest analysis, but they are one of the many atrocities that we lived through in the 90s, when after tremendously poorly done studies the Central Bank came to do seminars throughout Latin America and practically all the countries converted their central banks in self-employed.
These were the main factors in not being able to adequately face the crisis of 99 in Ecuador: the lack of coordination between the executive branch and the autonomous Central Bank. And it was funny because they were autonomous from our towns, but quite dependent on the IMF and World Bank, where all that bureaucracy is going to end its last days of sacrifice with salaries and retirements that they themselves created in the autonomous central banks.
Examples abound and outrageous. I once, as Minister of Economy in 2005 I wanted to use a Central Bank office and they leased it to me; But the IMF had a whole free floor. So, it was really awful things.
It is regrettable that the crisis has not been used by the capitalist powers to defeat neoliberalism once and for all. The State returns momentarily to the fore to put order in the finances of irresponsible and corrupt banking institutions. But regulation is seen as temporary and temporary. Although the most fundamentalist neoliberalism has been momentarily weakened, and we have evolved towards a new consensus of “regulatory liberalism”, the pillars of that paradigm remain unharmed: capital movements without any ties, and capital's supremacy over the other factors of production and certainly about human labor. Unfortunately, the perverse ideology disguised as science, which postulates that the market should be the great manager of all human activity, has not been (as it should) been buried in the trunk of memories.
We can say then that the financial system has been stabilized, but that none of the more serious underlying problems have been fundamentally rethought.
Faced with this reality, and the fact that the great powers of the North have not been able to place themselves at the forefront of change, then it is incumbent upon us to the South, and in particular to this Latin America that has been the engine of so many important changes in the last years, propose solutions for humanity. We, from Our America, can and must be the managers of new ways of understanding the economy, politics and social relations.
I am convinced that the only way to alleviate the social, political and economic contradictions in the world today is through a drastic change in the accumulation model. I believe, therefore, that the so-called socialism of the 21st century should be the Latin American response to the exhaustion of the neoliberal model promoted by the North; but to be honest and exact, enthusiastically promoted by certain elites in our countries. The socialism of the 21st century must be our response to the exclusive, speculative and destructive neoliberalism of the environment.
But they will ask themselves: what is the socialism of the XXI century? The best answer is that: 21st century socialism is under construction, and that this construction is perhaps its greatest wealth. If we get to have all the answers, if we are entrenched in dogmatic truths, then we will simply repeat the errors of classical socialism, whose excessive dogmatism, lack of spontaneity and adaptability to the challenges of humanity, made it fail as a global project . One of the biggest mistakes of classical socialism was to believe in catechisms.
That is why I really liked listening to the President of Uruguay, dear Pepe, with all his career on the left, guerrilla, political prisoner, being so pragmatic and avoiding dogmatism. There is no greater danger for our projects of change, of equity, of justice than fundamentalisms, infantilisms.
Today we are suffering from those visions in Ecuador, which I call: "Children's Left". As Pepe said yesterday, that by wanting to change everything, he will not change absolutely anything and he will be the best ally of the status quo, of the power groups and of the right wing. We cannot afford to make these mistakes, we have to have very clear principles, but be very objective, very pragmatic,
But, if the socialism of the XXI century retains this name, it is because it also retains certain and many traits in common with classical socialism.
In the first place, the socialism of the XXI century, like classical socialism, is born from the popular struggles and hopes to build a more just world, remember that Marxism emerged as a response to savage capitalism, today responses to this savage globalization very similar are needed to what Karl Marx lived and witnessed, back in the 19th century as a consequence of the Industrial Revolution, a revolution that made workers work 7 days a week, 16 hours a day, who fell dead in front of the exhausted machines, who worked children of 5 years. How could all these abuses of this savage capitalism be stopped? With collective action, the consolidation of the National States that put a limit to this exploitation, labor rights were created, etc.
Today the same mistakes are being repeated, they want to make a globalization that seeks not to become citizens of the world, but consumers of the world; that seeks to create a world society, but a world market, and there are no governance substitutions to control that market. So how do poor countries compete? By making its labor force more precarious and, in this way, Latin America, in recent years, has impoverished its labor force, extreme forms of labor exploitation have become widespread. In Ecuador, for example, outsourcing is labor intermediation, this meant that companies did not have workers, but instead hired workers from a third company and thus denied the right to stability, profits, etc. They were companies without workers, without the fundamental responsibility of having adequately paid workers, with relevant working conditions, etc. All that we eliminate in our government.
There can be no socialism of the XXI century behind the people's backs, without the development of intense processes of material equality, participation, democratization and transparency of public affairs.
21st century socialism also coincides with classical socialism in the supremacy of human labor over capital. For us, human labor is not just another factor of production, but the very end of production.
Another coincidence between 21st century socialism and classical socialism is the importance attached to collective action for development. This is contrasted with capitalist individualism, in which selfishness was elevated to social virtue. The socialism of the XXI century rejects this premise and highlights, on the contrary, virtues such as solidarity and reciprocity between human beings, the union of efforts, collective action, and cooperation and complementarity between economic actors, instead of the exclusive approach in competitiveness as a remedy for all ills.
The socialism of the 21st century rejects this cult of individualistic competitiveness, which has created great winners and losers, that is to say: a great inequality that today is at the root of most of the problems that afflict our Latin American societies.
The socialism of the XXI century defends, therefore, the role of the State, which, let's not forget, is the politically institutionalized expression of society and the will of the collective. As such, 21st century socialism once again gives importance to the State and the fundamental role it has to play in the economy, in planning, in redistribution, and in the fairer and more equitable social development of our countries.
That is why another characteristic that unites 21st century socialism with classical socialism is the emphasis on social justice, an aspect that is especially relevant in the most unequal region of the planet, where there are people as poor as in Africa and more prosperous than in Switzerland.
All of our actions are permeated with the desire for social justice. We must redistribute poorly distributed wealth, for example, through an efficient and staggered tax regime, and the presence of the State in the supply of universal services, with our preferential option being that of the poorest. But, we must also go further. Not only must it be redistributed, it must be well distributed from the start; that is, to affect from the root the conditions that promote the insulting inequality that we live, in particular the property regime and the form of work organization that characterizes our societies. With inequality, we will not be able to have a good life, social peace, or sustainable development. This is perhaps one of the greatest challenges for socialism in the 21st century.
How, then, is 21st century socialism different from previous socialisms? In the first place, in the 21st century, revolutionary visions based on violent change or archaic notions such as the "dictatorship of the proletariat" can no longer be sustained. Nor can we eliminate private property. Instead, we must bet on the democratization of property and the means of production, without ruling out, of course, that the State is also the owner of important strategic sectors. But, one of the great challenges of socialism of the XXI century is to seek that workers, communities, and ordinary citizens, become owners of the means of production. We want a divided country, a country of small owners. Democratizing property is the best way to ensure an adequate distribution of income.
One of the great errors of classical socialism, and in that it did not differ from capitalism, was its notion of development based on exclusively materialist, developmental and productivist visions. In this sense, the great challenge of 21st century socialism is to present a new conception of development. We have to defend a vision of development where we not only seek to consume to "live better", but where the goal is "good living", in harmony with nature, with regional, ethnic, and gender equity and intergenerational justice. .
In Ecuador, 21st century socialism is strongly inspired by Good Living, which our ancestors advocated. Our socialism of the XXI century therefore adds new parameters to what we understand by development, in which the empowerment of human capacity, professional satisfaction, the defense of identities of all kinds, the harmony between human beings play a very important role. , and between beings and their environment.
In fact, the socialism of the XXI century proposes an important paradigmatic change in front of what we understand as economy. It privileges use values ​​over exchange values, and human well-being over consumption capacity. There are benefits of immense value but without price, such as citizen security, social peace, the environment, and the very air we breathe, without which we could not exist. Taking this conceptual turn is perhaps one of the greatest challenges for socialism of the 21st century.
Ecuador is fighting to see this paradigmatic change, this revolution. We are doing it, for example, through the Yasuní ITT initiative. Our proposal to the world is that the most important oil reserve in our country should not be exploited, and that the oil be left underground. By doing this, our purpose is to protect the immense biodiversity of this environmental treasure that is the Yasuní and to avoid, at the same time, the consumption of this fossil energy that would produce more carbon emissions. In return, Ecuador seeks that the international community contributes with half of the income that Ecuador will cease to receive by not exploiting its oil reserves; In other words, that the world begins to value use goods such as the oxygen produced by the Amazon, above the various consumer goods products of oil activity. This Yasuní ITT initiative is truly revolutionary. It is a milestone in the implementation of a new economic logic.
The socialism of the XXI century is, therefore, in permanent evolution before the realities of each country. It does not seek to implement immutable recipes. On the contrary, the socialism of the XXI century must be conditioned to the characteristics and needs of each country and each people. This allows the existence of an Ecuadorian, Uruguayan, Venezuelan, Bolivian or Argentine socialism, with their differences and with their similarities. The socialism of the 21st century must be versatile in order to adapt to the different realities of each of our nations.
The socialism of the XXI century seeks, therefore, to redefine the development model and seeks to promote a transition towards a modernity understood in our own Latin American terms. Achieving this also requires greater sovereignty. Our constant weakness as a disadvantaged region has historically encouraged interventions, interference, unjust conditions, blockades and coups d'état.
Today, at last, the conditions exist and the political will to turn the page on the long and sad neoliberal night and end the traditional patterns of dependency produced by the international division of labor. Latin America is experiencing a true awakening to reposition itself as a region that is respected globally.
However, it is clear that much of this effort happens to stop acting in isolation, and stop competing meanly against each other. To achieve collective and coordinated action, it is necessary to achieve this old Latin American desire, which is the search for our integration. Without this integration process, our efforts to build fairer, more sustainable and equitable development alternatives will inevitably fail, since we will not be able to resist the onslaught of the world market and of the old and new powers that dominate it. Fortunately, we can say today that giant steps are being taken in this direction. We are overcoming great obstacles to give life to UNASUR: a truly encouraging integration process that can, at last, allow South America to become a weighty block in the international arena.
Ecuador, from the pro-tempore presidency of UNASUR, can affirm today with satisfaction that UNASUR is moving forward. The last meetings have been very successful; Proof of this is the historic commitment that its twelve members have assumed with Haiti.
When have we seen South America react so quickly? When have we seen South America dedicate resources of this magnitude to help, rebuild and contribute to the development of a Latin American country? Our mutual cooperation used to be merely symbolic, tiny compared to the vast resources that the US or Europe could count on and offer.
Today, UNASUR's multilateral aid to Haiti amounts to 300 million dollars, not counting the initiatives of each country in the order of bilateral relations. Although this amount does not exceed the contributions of the industrialized countries, it is on the same scale. We have finally understood that only by uniting our collective action can we be a strong region, respected internationally and with a powerful voice that defines its position on the great decisions of humanity.
Ecuador is also a member of the Bolivarian Alliance of the Peoples of Our America (ALBA), an initiative that seeks to integrate ourselves around social, political and economic proposals that break with our neocolonial past. From ALBA, a group of countries have given way to an integration based on solidarity, on complementarity, on the articulation of our peoples, not only from the needs of the market or business elites, but to go beyond the open-ended commercial logic, towards an integration that seeks energy, food and industrial sovereignty and brotherhood between our peoples.
ALBA also seeks to question the archaic international financial architecture inherited from the Bretton Woods agreements; an architecture from which Latin America, as well as most of the countries of the South, have been totally excluded. The members of ALBA refuse to continue playing a role of vassalage in international institutions. We do not want to continue subjecting ourselves to humiliating conditions, as well as often absurd and devoid of economic sense, to access credit. We seek, therefore, a reengineering of the international financial system, to give life to a more just, equitable and democratic system.
The democratization of the international system is vital. Financial institutions must be democratized, and the dictatorship of international bureaucracies that have done us so much damage from the IMF and the World Bank must end. More political bodies must also be democratized, such as the United Nations. It is still absurd that today the largest and most important parliament in the world, the United Nations General Assembly, does not have binding decision-making power, and that this privilege is exclusive to the Security Council.
But, Latin America is on the right track, it is generating real changes. While many in the world seek to apply temporary patches to save a decrepit, dying neoliberalism, which sooner or later will fall into crisis again, we, from the South, opted for bold and sovereign changes. We have created the Bank of the South, to be able to access sources of liquidity without having to accept embarrassing conditions. We have given life to the Bank of ALBA, and these days we are inaugurating the initiative of the Unique System of Regional Compensation for Payments (SUCRE), so as not to depend on the dollar in our transactions and reduce the costs of our commercial exchanges.
We also celebrate that the recent Summit of the Unity of Latin American and Caribbean States, in Cancun, has given birth to a new organization, the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, the first entirely Latin American and Caribbean axis of integration. How is it possible that we have waited so long to give life to an organization that includes all of Latin America, without the extra-regional interests of countries that do not share the same common history with us being represented in the same organization? What was achieved at this Summit was historic. It is a great legacy so that our daughters and sons, granddaughters and grandsons, can integrate among themselves, in a sovereign and independent Latin America, and with real weight in the important decisions that humanity must make in the future.
We are convinced that a vital prerequisite for Latin America to reposition itself on a global level is to conquer our sovereignty, the same one that was truncated after our independence processes. That is why Ecuador refuses to continue being conditioned by the good (or bad) will of the countries that have granted themselves the right to judge our good behavior. They have done it brandishing reports on freedom of expression written by business groups that defend the news as merchandise and that only think about the well-being of their businesses; or reports on the fight against drug trafficking and money laundering, written in bad faith, full of lies and weeds, and with clear political motivations, to weaken our transformation processes.
How strange it is that precisely those who have done the most to plunge us into misery to feed with it its splendorous development and its waste, are now created authorized to judge us, classify us, put us on letterheads and give us certificates of good behavior, in the name of the sacrosanct capital!
In Our America we are more than 500 million people, we could make up one of the largest economies in the world; we have a third of the fresh water sources on the planet; we are ranked first in world food production; and, we have hydrocarbon reserves for the next 100 years.
We are the mind, the hands and the forces of the same heart, the common ideas of a desire for integration that work for peace, for the safety of our citizens, for the sustainable and sustainable production of agriculture that respects the environment, education, sports, science and technology, art; We have to continue working with more enthusiasm to find mechanisms that make food sovereignty possible, energy sovereignty, the creation of a joint investment fund; We have to honor the lives of our peoples by generating the technical and scientific conditions for the production of medicines.
The creation of common monetary spaces, larger than the mere isolated economies of small states and nations, is an imperative need in the medium term, in the face of globalization, this blind and cruel process that tends to turn us into mere consumers, instead of citizens of the world; they want to turn us into huge markets, instead of realizing us as societies respectful of their diversity. We have proposed to deepen the integration of supranational spaces of monetary-financial sovereignty, capable of reducing the perverse effects suffered by our economies due to their connection with the international financial system.
We must join forces to promote the elimination of all discriminatory measures against human mobility; We will not tire of claiming the right to free human mobility throughout the planet. There are no illegal human beings, what exists is a set of illegal and immoral practices, such as racism, xenophobia, and, on the other hand, coyoterism and exploitation.
Our commitment to international politics is clear and is based on relationships based on dialogue, the promotion of the rights of citizens in any part of the world and international solidarity.
We cannot continue to be conditioned by the image that others build of us. We can make efforts to better communicate our intentions, convince the world that our proposals are noble; But we cannot slow down the pace or the depth of our emancipation because they speak ill of us, because our “country risk” rises or falls, even less depending on the market value of our debt on financial and speculative platforms in the north.
For this reason, Ecuador has abandoned the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), a nefarious body attached to the World Bank, dedicated to settling disputes between investors and States through arbitration procedures, but in such a way delivered to the interests of the big multinationals that is deprived of all legitimacy and credibility. Under the argument of the famous "legal certainty", the same one that neoliberalism has always undermined, ICSID has done nothing more than protect investors above any norm of national or international law. The states are devoid of mechanisms to appeal their rulings. There are no formal judicial bodies, but a kind of privatization of justice that always ends up favoring big capital and harming the interests of the peoples. ICSID is the symbol of that blackmail of neoliberalism, which subjects Latin American nations to unacceptable conditions in exchange for a pseudo-recognition that we provide suitable conditions for foreign investment.
In the case of Ecuador, it is shown that true investors, those with good intentions and sustainable investment plans, prefer to invest in a country that treats its population and workers well, and that has a well-thought-out development plan already long term, rather than in the unstable and corrupt banana republics of yesteryear, given over to the ups and downs of a capricious and volatile world economy.
Ecuador also refuses to accept impositions and neocolonialisms in the area of ​​security. We will continue to fight successfully, as we have been doing, against drug trafficking and organized crime mafias. But we cannot accept, under the pretext of the war on drugs, new patterns of domination. That is why we have refused to renew the Manta Military Base agreement with the US, negotiated and signed by neoliberal governments committed to foreign interests. Our soil, today, and as required by our Constitution, is and will be free from any foreign military presence, wherever it comes from.
There is still a long way to go for Latin America to free itself once and for all from the presence of foreign military bases on its soil. But we trust that the rejection of this type of practice grows more and more, so that we all assume that position historically defended by Uruguay, contrary to the existence or establishment of foreign military bases, not only in your country, but also in any territory. from Latin America.
Ours is not an exacerbated nationalism. Despite the friction with Colombia after the bombing of our territory on March 1, 2008, we never fell into xenophobias, less into exclusionary policies. The hundreds of thousands of Colombian sisters and brothers living in Ecuador can attest to this. On the contrary, Ecuador, which is the largest recipient of refugees in Latin America, far from seeking to repress or outlaw those who have fled the heartbreaking internal conflict in Colombia, has given way to a policy of “comprehensive registration”, legalizing more than 130,000 refugees Colombians in our territory. This solidarity with human beings regardless of their origin, is also another humanistic foundation of 21st century socialism. We believe in human mobility and unmask the double standard of neoliberalism, which, while encouraging the free movement of goods and capital, and promoting Free Trade Agreements, outlaws and represses the movement of human beings.
Within the framework of this inclusive and supportive vision, respectful of the self-determination of the peoples, we cannot accept the deplorable situation in Honduras, we cannot accept the situation of consummated policies, based on the interference of any force in democratic life and the consent of the media powers at the international level; we remain firm in not recognizing the government resulting from this irregular situation that offends us all, we consider that the restoration of constitutional order in Honduras must overcome the acceptance of the current situation as a lesser evil, as seems to be the strategy of the anti-democratic forces . The solution must be built from the real democratic vocation of the Honduran people to decide with total guarantee about their future.
We are categorical in affirming that constitutional and democratic ruptures should not be allowed in our Region. We cannot accept a policy of forgiveness and forgetting a coup, simply because there are elections organized by the coup plotters. The principles that we advocate, the principles that we uphold, must be respected.
More than nationalism then, ours is "sovereignty". We seek to regain self-esteem after decades, perhaps centuries, of a lack of self-confidence. Latin Americans are as capable as anyone else. We can be excellent professionals, scientists, entrepreneurs, etc. We can be efficient and succeed in what we set out to do. For this reason, the international division of labor is not an irreversible fatality, which destines some to produce high value-added goods and others to continue entangled in a disastrous agro-primary-export matrix. Sustainable development is possible. It is enough to believe that we can and will have won the first great battle. Self-esteem is one of the main essences of development.
The socialism of the 21st century, with its paradigm shift, with its emphasis more on human capacity than human capital, may seem like an idealistic, unattainable, and utopian proposition. One must also think about the means to achieve this, such as, for example, changing the balance of power on which the great asymmetries of this world are sustained. As the great Uruguayan thinker and activist, our good friend Eduardo Galeano, says:
Utopia is on the horizon. I walk two steps and she walks away. Ten steps, and the horizon runs ten steps further. And then, what is utopia for? For that, it serves to walk.
Let us then walk together, Uruguay, Ecuador and Our America united towards a hopeful horizon. We cannot miss this historic opportunity to regain control of our own destiny. Latin America can and must be strong in the world to participate in the great decisions that affect the future of our human species and the planet. We owe it to our peoples, who have been marginalized for centuries in a world that has excluded them.
Let's walk together, Uruguay and Ecuador, along that path that Montalvo already traveled and Rodó and that, from another territory, more playful, but no less passionate, also visited a beloved citizen of our Homelands, the unforgettable Alberto Spencer, idol of both countries.
Here, in the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, when attending the presidential inauguration of a distinguished fighter like Pepe Mujica, heir to the unitary policy of the Broad Front, that democratic and revolutionary alliance that was born with General Líber Seregni, with Tabaré Vázquez, with the struggle of an entire people, with the human and intellectual devotion of Sendic and Onetti, of Benedetti and Zitarrosa, we have the privilege of invoking the great José Gervasio Artigas, with words that seem to have been written for our days: "I will not sell the rich man heritage of the Orientals at the vile price of necessity ", he said, and his creed of faith in independence took him to the forefront of history, when he exclaimed:" May the most unhappy be the most privileged. " That phrase by Artigas is also our phrase, our devotion and our ethics.
Ever onward to victory
Thanks a lot!