Citizens of the Republic:
Today we celebrate one hundred and eighty-nine years of the triumph of the libertarian cause, of the Homeland and of the Great Homeland, on the slopes of Pichincha, under the command of General Antonio José de Sucre. Dark, very dark were the times of colonial rule.
The voices of the Precursor Eugenio de Santa Cruz y Espejo were filled with winds from the people when he summoned in the streets, in the squares, in the academy, in the convents, through the publications of the “Free Quiteño” of the “New Luciano”, when he called to conspire against colonialism, against submission, concertation and slavery. Women like Manuela Espejo, Manuela Cañizares along with Montufar, Quiroga, Cuero and Caicedo, Juan Larrea, thousands of anonymous patriots, formed the army of freedom. After almost three centuries of chains, the first libertarian cry was launched on August 10, 1809, in Quito, and a year later, on August 2, 1810, the patriots and the Quito people, almost defenseless, suffered the most bloody revenge of the colonial power.
Forbidden to forget, let's learn from history. That massacre was also denied! It did not exist! For a long time it was hidden. There were no culprits. No one was tried for these crimes.
Ten years later, the independence cause reached its first triumph, on October 9, 1820, in Guayaquil. The final victory was won in the Battle of Pichincha, on May 24, 1822. This battle was fought in the clouds, at more than three thousand meters high, the condor planned the skirmishes, the old mountain moved slowly, promoting the step of the liberators, flanking the ravines the puma slipped away; the sparrow and the hummingbird helped. The patriot army climbed the steep slopes of the Pichincha; It was made up of the unit since it was made up of soldiers from Guayaquil, Sangolquí, Cuenca, Riobamba, Quito, Daule, Samborondón, Manabí; Internationalist warriors called by Simón Bolívar came from Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Chile, England, Peru, Venezuela and other nations of America and Europe. The republican army arrived armed with hopes, it was loaded with dreams of a different world. Around 3,000 men were under the command of General Antonio José de Sucre. On the other side, on the other hand, those who defended exploitation and fear, under the command of Melchor Aymerich, stationed in El Panecillo and other strategic places in Quito.
This was, in reality, the first battle that the peoples of Latin America fought together, it was constituted in the crucible in which forces and desires, dreams and hopes of the peoples called to constitute that nation of nations, that people of peoples, merged. which is the Great Homeland; Homeland of the different and equal, of the different but never more unequal. People of joyous and singers, of those who fight singing and awake, dream of new dawns of equity and justice, of distributed lands, of shared schools, of roads open to pure heart, to pure foolishness in affection, to pure stubbornness in love .
They formed the nationalist and emancipatory army the battalions Paya, Albión, Alto Magdalena, Yaguachi, Trujillo and Piura; the Dragoons of the South squadrons, Grenadiers on horseback from the Andes, Lancers, and the Cavalry. The royalists formed the First Battalions of Aragon, Shooters of Cádiz, Light Hunters of Constitution and the squadrons Dragons of Granada, Dragons of Queen Isabel, Dragons Guard and Hussars of Fernando VII.
We must never forget that that was a continental struggle, led by Simón Bolívar, by San Martín; that constituted our first independence: but the "lied independence", kidnapped by the Creole oligarchies, to whose benefits the common people, the indigenous people, the women, the Afro-descendants were not invited; Ultimately, those who, with their work, raised the country, were not invited to those freedom festivals. Now, we are standing in front of history to tell our heroes that their efforts were not in vain nor were their sacrifices lost, because we, without forgetting their memory, are also willing to fight for a dream, that of a Latin America united by the ideal. of equality, freedom and justice.
As Neruda recognized in his “Canto a Bolívar”, a hundred years passed and the people woke up again, voices arose hurricanes of dignity, patriotism, the same hearts, inflamed with love for the Homeland, were looking for a new horizon: to rescue Ecuador from the clutches of obscurantism, take it to modernity, communicate its regions, integrate and awaken creative enthusiasm, the dormant forces of industry, of progress ... The creative virtues were gripped by landowner power, based on concertation, a cruel system of appropriation of the work and life of the indigenous people. The Church owned, alone, more than half of the arable land. A certain dome of the church encouraged fanaticism, resisted the necessary changes ... Another historical coincidence!
The Old Fighter, our General Eloy Alfaro, led the triumphant revolution. Against the best Ecuadorian in history, the same powers that today try to stop the changes in progress were primed. They called him a traitor, execrable, despicable, nefarious, tyrant. They incited the assassination, to crush the viper, as a few days ago an editorial in the press called to "put the bell on the cat" and send the current government home. Another historical coincidence! We are not even close to the level of an Alfaro, but we are honored to share the same enemies with him: the corrupt press, a certain fundamentalist leadership of the church, the omnimous economic powers, the powers that be; the same ones who organized the most nefarious and cruel crime in our republican history, the immolation of the illustrious revolutionary who continues to illuminate us with his example; They raised the bonfire, killed as many as they could, tried to set fire to Montoneros ideals, wanted to melt the libertarian machete, but only managed to illuminate the spirits with the torch of insurrection. How much horror, inequity arose with the barbarian bonfire! Perhaps, after a hundred years, have guilty been established? Were those responsible for this crime investigated? Were the perpetrators of this murder punished? Another historical coincidence: the same sectors involved, the same shadows, the same attempts at impunity!
We honor the dream of Bolívar, Sucre, Calderón, our Manuelas; We honor the blood of our heroes, we follow the path of Alfaro, for the integration of the sister republics, for the development of our peoples, for the second and definitive independence of the Homeland.
189 years ago, on the slopes of the Pichincha, among the cliffs, "above the clouds", he did not fight for glory or riches; he fought to free the captive country; He fought to win the longed-for peace that the peoples required in order to continue living, to build the future in freedom, with dignity. Our heroes gave their lives for life.
We celebrate that victory once again. Victory for dignity, for subversive memory, for the achievement of freedom through justice. Dreams remain, they survive after almost two centuries of vicissitudes. Dreams are reborn, once again, but the battle we are waging today is being waged with books, with medicines, with the bullets of justice, of equity. We are living a true change of time, not just a time of change.
In this unprecedented, historical process of radical democracy Today we celebrate a new victory, because the sovereign people have ratified their order to move forward, they have spoken at the polls in favor of deepening the changes that we started four years ago, the profound, peaceful but irreversible changes.
On May 7, the people answered the TEN questions submitted to a universal, secret and direct vote, and said a resounding and sovereign YES for the Homeland.
The questions, in their decision to provide more security, change a dire state of justice, deconcentrate the powers that be and prevent their abuses, seek a healthier environment for our youth, our families, end corruption and labor exploitation ..., These questions caused so much fear that they aroused the active participation of the largest coalition of forces that any government has ever faced, from the ultra-right to the supposed ultra-left, along with the usual powers: banks, the media, and even recalcitrant sectors. of the Ecclesiastical Dome.
They put together a true state of siege to ideas, they overwhelmed the most elementary norms of respect for intelligence; They summoned ignorance to negatively vote, they insulted common sense, we were slandered every day, incidents were deliberately generated at every step. Never, I insist, has any government faced such a coalition of forces, and, despite everything, the people categorically spoke out so that the past never returns, so that the future continues with the Citizen Revolution, so that no one tries to return.
To discredit us, they scornfully called welfare policies the human development bonus, the housing bonus, free medicines, school breakfast, books, uniforms issued by the government, everything that has had enormous successes in the reduction of poverty, inequality, the rate of schooling, mortality and morbidity. Let them be a little more honest and tell us what they would suppress. Do not forget, do not forget soldiers from my country and Ecuadorian people, that the largest subsidies in the history of this country, sucretization and bank bailouts, were not given to the poor, but to the rich. Why when opportunities are given to the poor is it welfare and when billions are blatantly transferred to the rich is it "responsibility"? Let's raise the level of decency and seriousness of Ecuadorian politics a little bit.
As is customary, they invented non-existent realities, with the complicity of supposed representatives of the poor. Just an illustrative example: Do you know how many sheep have been given away in the Citizen Revolution? You know, journalists? None. As part of an agreement with Uruguay to increase agricultural productivity (a very serious agreement that includes technical assistance, training, etc.), thousands of sheep of the best breed were brought, worthily bought by organized indigenous communities that for the first time accessed loans in the National Development Bank. Not a single one was given away, but he made himself believe that they were demagogically giving them away in exchange for votes.
Despite all this, the victory was overwhelming. Each and every one of the questions put to the consideration of the Ecuadorian people was approved, by margins that fluctuate between 250 thousand and more than one million votes. On average, about seven points of advantage have been obtained, which represents more than 520,000 votes per question. The YES was imposed in twelve provinces that represent about 80% of the country's population. In about 80% of the country's population, the YES prevails. Although this was a sui generis process in our four years of government, not comparable to any, we have obtained half a million more votes than in the last election in April 2009. Much easier, much simpler, we voted for something specific: President of the Republic, Vice President; not for ten questions, many of them quite difficult to understand. This is the unquestionable truth. If someone wants to continue fooling themselves, what can we do? There is no worse fool than the one who does not want to understand.
The triumph is not of the Government, it is the triumph of the country, of democracy. Of all those who participated in the elections, but also of those who did not; it is the triumph of those who voted YES and of those who voted NO; It is the triumph of children as well as of older adults, of those in uniform who were not obliged to vote –although with the new Constitution they can do so-; the triumph of our migrant brothers; the triumph of foreigners living temporarily or permanently in Ecuador, who can also vote if they have resided for more than 5 years in our country. All and all have triumphed, because democracy and participation triumphed. This victory, I insist, of all and of all, is the triumph of the Homeland.
Yesterday we put a wreath at Sucre's grave, buried, with all respect for our beloved Venezuela, in his Homeland, not only because Ecuador is part of the Great Homeland, but because as Bolívar himself said "the Homeland is not where it is it is born, but where it is fought ”. Sucre was someone extraordinary. He never abused his victorious condition, his position of strength. He always demanded after the battle exactly the same as before it.
Our Citizen Revolution is also Sucrista. After that resounding triumph on May 7, we will do exactly what we offered to our people. There are no hidden cards. We are honest, transparent people. We will comply with what we proposed and what the Ecuadorian people approved and ordered at the polls.
Now, each and everyone will be able to verify that the lies were not more than that, lies; Fortunately, for us, a lie repeated a thousand times will continue to be a lie. Some believe that in repetition is the demonstration. A thousand times they repeat a lie it will continue to be that, a lie.
All, all, will be able to benefit from the changes, they will be able to verify that nobody thought to "take over" of justice, but to make it efficient, as has already been done in Brazil, Chile and other sister countries of Latin America, where justice reform has been possible through executive decrees or legislative majorities. The wonderful thing is that we have put ourselves at the forefront, that we are now an example, that we are already a legend, we are living history, because we cannot help but admire the people who went to the polls to authorize a tripartite body, the restructuring of the judicial system within a certain period.
The triumph of YES brings us closer to the goal of achieving agile, transparent and effective justice. It is a great challenge that we assume, for us it was more comfortable not to call any consultation, to say "it is not our problem, it is not our responsibility". It is an immense challenge that we take on, because in 18 months we must lay the solid foundations for the Justice Revolution.
Justice has to stop being the dry branch of the tree of the Fatherland. With the support of all, of all, we are going to make justice change, because that is the mandate of the sovereign, and that is now the common task.
You have to recognize the levels of creativity to try to delegitimize victory. That the NO plus the null and white votes exceed the YES, blatantly contradicting article 106 of the Constitution, and assuming that the white votes –which normally imply adherence to the majority- and the null votes –which are mostly poorly cast votes- they reject the government's theses, when they are even below the historical average. That the reforms can only be applied in the provinces where the YES won, again contradicting art. 106 of the Constitution. Can you imagine if the NO had won and in the provinces where the YES won, the government would have sustained the sheer nonsense that the reforms are applied there? Does a prefect, a mayor, an assembly member exercise his authority or representation only in the cantons or parishes where he won? Now they tell us that the ruling assembly members of the provinces where the NO won are at a crossroads. So we have to understand that the opposition assembly members where the YES won are also at a crossroads, but they have already announced in an undemocratic way that they will not support the reforms. Some staunch opponents have announced that they will practice their right to "resistance", because the NO has won in their parishes, in their cantons or in their provinces.
Resistance is a right stipulated in Article 98 of our Constitution, against actions or situations that affect constitutional rights. Losing an absolutely constitutional and democratic popular consultation can never affect rights, but only the arrogance of so-called democrats at their convenience.
For the consultation, they have accused us of dividing the country. What a fallacy! With that brilliant criterion, then, the less the people are consulted ... the better! A democratic election can only divide fantasy democrats.
We will not fall into the hands of fools. The fundamentalism of a few cannot be opposed to the common good. We will not allow it. The Constitution, which certain groups invoke at will and which they respect so little in reality, clearly establishes in its Article 317 that non-renewable natural resources are the property of the State, and not of any particular group. We will exploit our natural resources with all the social, environmental, inter-generational responsibilities established by our Constitution and our own consciences, but it would be childish irresponsibility to be beggars sitting on a bag of gold. These groups that want to impose by force what they do not obtain by the votes, ruthlessly torturing the most elementary arithmetic have proclaimed themselves the winners of the Popular Consultation. If this is as true as they say, they will have no problem winning the next presidential elections, and then yes, then, they will be able to impose their political agenda. Meanwhile, the country will apply the policies established with all constitutional and democratic legitimacy by the Government of the Citizen Revolution. That is called democracy. Otherwise, we will also invoke the right to resistance: the right of the great majorities to resist against those who kidnapped and destroyed our education; against those who block roads, highways; against those who abuse and torture in the name of ancestral traditions; against those who, with their childish fundamentalism, want to keep us in misery.
We are not going to go to the rhythm of the slowest, of those who do not want anything to change. That would be undemocratic. It would be treason. We are going to go at the pace of those who want to change, of that vast majority that in eight consecutive elections has said yes to change.
The same bullets that killed Sucre in Beríritu, the same ones that consumed the life of the Liberator, the same ones that led to the Bárbara Bonfire, are also the same ones that incited, sponsored, and now try to leave the tragic events of 30 December unpunished. Last September, they are the same ones who seek to end our revolution.
My tribute to the fallen that sad day: to the student Juan Pablo Bolaños, who with tens of thousands of unarmed citizens went to the Police hospital to defend Democracy, to defend his, our, Revolution, and received him with a shot in the head; to the soldiers Jacinto Cortés and Darwin Panchi, who fell in the rescue of comrade President; the GIR policeman Froilán Jiménez, murdered while guarding the exit of the presidential vehicle… and some still deny that there was an assassination attempt. Our affection to the relatives of the police officer Edwin Calderón, killed in an absurd crossing of bullets near the Quito Regiment Number 2.
How much heroism! But also how much cowardice! Today, no one is guilty. Where are those who with such advantage, treachery, bloody, threw bombs at the President, beat defenseless citizens, fired murderous bullets? Where are those who with such arrogance and covered their faces, insulted, threatened, threw their motorcycles against the citizens ?! Where are those who patibularly gave the radio orders to kill the President? Where are those who in the Police Hospital, disguised as doctors, made fun of the convalescent President? Where are they?! Without a doubt, its cruelty is inversely proportional to its value. Neither assumes their responsibility, nor does they try to recover the lost honor.
Today GEO Captain Alex Guerra, a young soldier of the Nation, husband and father, is in a Washington hospital paraplegic by the murderous bullets, but no one is guilty.
History repeats itself: The massacre of August 2, 1810, the Bárbara Bonfire, on 30-S. Guilty: ZERO. All this, as always, with the conspiracy of a certain press, which does not seek the truth, but only damages the Government, with the complicity of corrupt judges, with the collusion of an immoral opposition. Either we change the history of our America now, or we never change it.
A special thanks to all the members of the Presidential Security Group, without whose courage and loyalty beyond what their duty demanded, I would not be addressing you at this time. The bravery and courage of Alexis Cifuentes, a police second lieutenant, whose ribs were broken by his own colleagues to protect us, and despite this he did not want to go home, he continued by the side of the President. Sergeant Alex Casierra and Captain Richard Piedra, who forced the entrance door to the hospital to open, closed by mendacious hands; Police Lieutenant Santiago Ordóñez, who risked his life driving the rescue vehicle; the army captain Bolívar Quiroga and the policeman Christian Bonilla, who with their own bodies protected the President as he left the hospital; the then Chief of Security of the Presidency, Commander Edgar Andrade, who did not leave the President for an instant, Lieutenant Commander Newton Briones, Army Captains Roberto Acurio, Franklin Celi, Pedro Rocha, Sergeants Luis Caiza, Eladio Lino, Patricio Flores, Alex Gómez. Sargento Edison Fuertes,whom the brutalized hordes wanted to burn alive, after Gabriel Dias, and so many others, who risked their lives to protect the President.
There were acts of heroism that commit me forever to the Armed Forces and to my country. That of the major Fausto Flores, hero of Cenepa, where he lost both legs, which was not limiting to participate in the rescue of the President, falling wounded in action. The members of the GIR, who, like Sucre in Tarqui, had to confront their own comrades in arms, under the orders given by their commander, Lieutenant Colonel Lenín Bolaños, if they did not shoot that way, shoot them.
The extraordinary professionalism of the GOE, led by Major Christian Miño. Our special recognition, especially to the GEO Special Operations Group, an elite group of the Armed Forces, who put the courage, bravery, professionalism, in these hard times, to safeguard our lives. Its commander, Lieutenant Colonel Vicente Guzmán, was wounded in the action, along with many of his men, I already mentioned Captain Alex Guerra, corporals Ermel Bustamante and Ángel Rivadaneira, and Sergeant Alirio Guama, among others. Also present were GEO officers Mayor Santiago Apolo and Lieutenant Juan Carlos Bonifaz. To all of them, thank you very much.
An endless hug of gratitude, of appreciation to the Armed Forces for their professional performance, attached to the Constitution, in those moments in which life was in danger, the integrity of the country itself.
All the heroes, the heroines, who actively participated in the reguardo and in the liberation of the President of all Ecuadorians, are in my heart, their names, their images are burned into my soul. Forgive me if I have not been able to name everyone, if I have forgotten anyone.
Certain media insist that nothing has happened, that the plagiarism of the President, the rescue, the assassination attempt, a "political operation", as the famous organ of the corrupt press called it. A "political operation" the heroism of our soldiers, the GEO, the GIR, the GOE? A "political operation" the hail of bullets, the dead, the wounded? A "political operation" all that dedication and sacrifice, in the face of so much cowardice and evil? Another coincidence of forgetfulness in national history? Could it be that they are specialists in erasing what interests them? Could it be that there is never what those same sectors are guilty of? It is again the attempt of a certain press to replace the Rule of Law with the State of Opinion, where they have absolute power and use it according to their interests.
September 30 is, unfortunately, a reality that we can never allow to be forgotten and worse still to be repeated. We will not allow the truth to be violated, the truth to be defeated, the truth to be held in the hands of a few information brokers.
Nor will we allow deaths like that of Professor Bosco Wisuma to go unpunished. We all know what happened, we all know who the murderers, accomplices, incitators are, but they also want to make this death invisible, and any accused, as is customary, is turned into a political victim. Again the State of Opinion against the Rule of Law, all for hurting the government, for empowering the opponents of the Citizen Revolution. How much irresponsibility! As long as I am President, impunity, never again, compatriots.
Dear soldiers of my country, dear fellow citizens:Have we reflected that a large part of what we believe, the information with which we make our daily decisions, family, business, professional, what we think of people we do not even know, depends on what we are silenced or told by half a dozen of families that own these businesses called national media? And with fallacious definitions of freedom of expression, as in the colony, when they made us believe that criticizing the king was criticizing God, and with that they kept us in mental and spiritual colony, today they tell us that criticizing those businesses is violate freedom of expression.
You know that I am a frontal man, they want to pass me off as arrogant; Overbearing is the one who violates the rights of others. I am capable of giving my life to defend the rights of others. I am impulsive as Velasco Ibarra was, as Alfaro was, as many have been, as you probably are. I am flesh and blood, but I am frontal, I am not afraid to say what I think, and I want to declare on this day, May 24, that I will dedicate during and after my Presidency the years that are necessary to unveil one of the greatest problems of our America: the dominance of the bourgeois press, turned into the new opium of our peoples, which transforms the States of Law into States of Opinion, where they rule illegitimately, I insist, according to their interests. You will see how sooner rather than later, history will prove us right.
Dear citizens, dear citizens:
Today is also a sad anniversary: ​​30 years of the premature, unexpected, painful departure of that extraordinary Ecuadorian and Latin American planetary leader, Jaime Roldós Aguilera, whom I greatly admired. That young President who returned us to democracy, facing –as the Citizen Revolution faces- the same enemies: the powers that be, the omnimous economic powers, the recalcitrant right wing. He, his wife died, a total of nine fellow citizens, the Minister of Defense, his wife, pilots, stewardesses ... Every death is painful; But I am sure that if that premature death had not occurred, the history of the country would be different, the history of my province, Guayas, would be different.
God knows why he does things. In any case, we must not forget who that young, brave, brilliant president, Jaime Roldós Aguilera, had to confront: again, the same actors that the Citizen Revolution has to confront. Our tribute to that extraordinary young President, his wife and all those who died in that tragic plane crash in the south of the country, on May 24, 30 years ago.
And on this May 24, greetings to you, to the uniformed people, to the direct heirs of the libertarian deed; A hug from Homeland, because we know that the Ecuadorian Armed Forces are full of people, of democratic fervor, of respect for the constitutional order; a deep and affectionate greeting on the HUNDRED-EIGHTY-NINTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE VICTORIA DE PICHINCHA; our permanent commitment to comply with everything that its institutional development demands, the well-being of its members (which is the most important thing) and their families; and a thank you to the families of all our soldiers. The military vocation, more than a profession, is a vocation, a vocation, a calling… The military vocation is not just a vocation for the military, it belongs to his entire family. We know that you can be here thanks to the support of your wives, your children, your parents. To all of them, our embrace of solidarity, our deep gratitude. All of you are in our hearts, in our vocation for peace and a future with dignity.
If the Creole elites, who always held economic power, took away the victory from the people, in their first independence, by forcibly leaving the vast majority outside the process of building the Homeland, women, the poor , to the Indians, to the mestizos; by leaving out those who were part of the vast majority. If the most protective interests snatched the Liberal Revolution from the people with the assassination of Eloy Alfaro, the Citizen Revolution is willing to risk everything for everything for the future of equity, peace, dignity, sovereignty, for the Sumak kawsay. This authentic revolution that has the soul of the people, that has the backing of the vast majorities, nothing and no one can stop it, it is irreversible, it is advancing towards true justice, towards freedom, towards hope.
Surely the "critics" tomorrow will say that I have lost a historic opportunity to call for national unity (another of the tired speeches, of the usual common luxuries, right?). I am not deceiving myself or deceiving myself. Today, cynically, the same people on the bank holiday want to teach us about unity. The infantile left pretends to make the revolution with the applause of the bourgeois press.
The Old Fighter has already said it: "If instead of facing danger I had committed the vileness of going over to the enemy, we would have had peace, a lot of peace, the peace of the colony."
We have always been open to dialogue. We are the most participatory government in history, meeting day by day with countless groups, traveling to every corner of the country to listen to our citizens, rendering accounts every week about our work, meeting where not even an undersecretary has arrived before. But we cannot be naive. We are not administering a system, we are changing it, and those accustomed to ruling de facto in this country do not seek union, they seek submission, and we were not born for that.
As Silvio Rodríguez sings, in “El Necio”:
Could it be that foolishness gave birth to me?
Is the folly of what today is foolish?
The folly of taking on the enemy?
The folly of living without a price?
Personally, I am more optimistic than ever. What we have achieved is truly impressive, a planetary example. The Popular Consultation of Ecuador has been followed by the whole world. Very soon - listen to me well - very soon many countries will follow, to a greater or lesser extent, the example set by our country.
Not to be afraid, my dear compatriots, to have faith.
As I told you on January 17, 2007, when I assumed the Presidency of Ecuador: I will never disappoint my compatriots, and I will dedicate all my effort, with the help of God and under the libertarian shadows of Bolívar and Alfaro, to fight for my Country, for that just, haughty and sovereign Homeland that we all dream of and that we all deserve.
Ever onward to victory!