Dear Heads of State and Government of the Americas,
a fraternal greeting and sincere thanks to the president of
Panama, Juan Carlos Varela, his collaborators and the people of
this beautiful country at the waist of our America, for the warm
welcome that he gives us.
I wish to greet the new Secretary General of the OAS
(Organization of American States), Luis Almagro,
recently elected at the meeting of the General Assembly of
Washington and that faces a difficult but unavoidable challenge,
radically transform that institution. We send a greeting
in solidarity with the people of Chile and its president Michelle Bachelet, who
courageously bear the dire effects of recent
floods in their countries. All our support to the president
Santos and his unwavering political will to continue in the
road to definitive peace in Colombia. But peace dear
friends, it is not only the absence of war, the insulting opulence of
a few in Latin America, next to the most intolerable
poverty; it is also a daily bullet against dignity
human. That is why I believe that the motto of the summit, instead of
“Prosperity with Equity” should be “Equity, Justice, for the
Prosperity".
Today we are attending a historic event, in a triumph and restricted to the
dignity, sovereignty and solidarity among peoples.
We welcome the sister Republic of Cuba, as a member of
full rights of this forum, which should never have been excluded. Without
However our joy cannot be complete; there is still
remove the inhuman and illegal blockade against Cuba. Is also
pending the return to Cuba of the occupied territory of
Guantanamo.
Compañeras, compañeros, in the Cold War it was sustained in the
region to the bloodiest dictatorships. So yeah, no matter
not at all press freedoms, human rights, the same
democracy. Let us remember, for example, that the Assembly of the
1976 OAS, was held in Santiago de Chile and was chaired by
Chancellor Augusto Pinochet. Invasive and meddling action
during those years, it was based on the fight against communism. Now
the argument is the defense of human rights. The order
President Obama's executive against Venezuela, violates
flagrantly international law, and particularly the literal
e) of Article 3 of the OAS Charter. The answer to each side
of the region has been forceful, rejecting the executive order and
asking for his withdrawal. Our peoples will never again accept the
guardianship, interference or intervention. Your memory is lacerated
for the abuses and violence of the past. Panama is a good
example of that, with the invasion of December 1989 that
caused thousands of deaths to remove the bloody dictator who
the invaders themselves had supported. However, the
illegal interventions. A few weeks ago, officials of the
state department, requested the Congress of the States
United to “support press freedom, human rights,
and democracy in the hemisphere, including Cuba, Venezuela,
Ecuador and Nicaragua ”. Are we really interested in these topics?
Okay, so let's discuss them in this forum. Let's talk about rights
humans: according to ECLAC (Economic Commission for
Latin America), in the period 2013-2007, Ecuador is one of the 3
Latin American countries that have reduced inequality the most.
During our Government of the historical reduction in 12.5 points
percentage points, only 5.4 points are due to the growth effect and 7.1
by effect of redistribution. In Ecuador we do not have torture, shame
death, or extrajudicial executions. With the judicial reform
approved by citizens in popular consultation in 2011,
the judges are selected by public competition of merits,
organized by an autonomous body of the Executive. Finally this
It is very important, Ecuador is one of the only 7 countries of the
35 of the hemisphere, which has signed absolutely all the
Inter-American Human Rights Instruments; Many
countries have not even ratified the American Convention on
Human Rights or Pact of San José. The reality is no
we only need a new human rights right, but a
new inter-American system. We must understand that
Americas north and south of the Rio Grande are different and we must
converse as blocks. The OAS has historically been
captured by interests and visions of North America, and its
eyebrows and accumulated atavisms make it inefficient and little
reliable for the new times in Latin America and the
Caribbean. An example was the Falklands War, where
destroyed the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
(TIAR), which should have been enough for the OAS
disappear. Our solidarity embrace to the Argentine people and their
struggle for the Falklands, blatant example of colonialism in the
XXI century. Another example was the decades that Cuba was
absurdly excluded from the OAS, or the same blockade against
Cuba.
The Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
(CELAC), should be the forum for Latin American discussions and
Caribbean, and the OAS should become the forum in which, as
blocks, CELAC and North America process their matches
and conflicts. Regarding the Inter-American System of Rights
Humans, in that health little coherence, that we can only
participate in the different instances the countries that we have
ratified the inter-American convention, for example, the Commission
Inter-American Human Rights is based in Washington
which has not rectified the Pact of San José, and also said
commission is unnecessary. The Inter-American Court based in
San José can and should have the functions of promoting the
human rights and judge the attacks against them as
occurs in the European system, where there is no commission, only
cut exists. As we understand very well that for the interests
created by the above is difficult to achieve, it is probably already
time to have a Latin American human rights system,
everything is ready, because basically we are the countries of America
Latina, those of us who have ratified the Pact of San José and in
Consequently, we are the only ones who recognize and
we submit to the Inter-American Court.
And let's talk about democracy, Thomas Jefferson, whom I admire
very much, one of America's founding fathers, is
the main author of one of the most beautiful documents of the
history of mankind, the Declaration of Independence of the
The United States, which in its second paragraph says: “All
Men are created equal, they are endowed by their Creator with
certain inalienable rights among these are life, liberty
and the pursuit of happiness ”, wonderful words but the
Jefferson himself owned hundreds of slaves, in
that time even for these extraordinary men was
unimaginable that blacks had rights. He had to pass
almost a century since the Declaration of Independence for the
elimination of slavery and exactly another century to the
suppression of racial segregation.
Today, Latin American elites are still incapable of
understand that fundamental rights are for everyone.
When these elites denounce the disrespect of their rights
humans is because for the first time they are on equal
conditions under the rule of law. When they denounce
dictatorships and authoritarianisms is because they can no longer submit
our governments at their whims and interests. And let's talk about
freedom of the press, when Latin American elites affirm
that there is no freedom of the press is because their media
communication no longer have impunity to manipulate the truth or
because we dare to answer them, to dispute their hegemony, to
unmask their lies. One might wonder if a society
can be called truly free, when the right to freedom
information and social communication itself are in the hands of
private for-profit businesses, and although this is a
planetary problem in Latin America, given the monopolies of
means, his family property, his serious ethical deficiencies and
professionals and their blatant involvement in politics, the
problem is much more serious. I think we all agree
that a good press is vital for a true democracy,
but we must also agree that bad press is deadly
for that same democracy; and the Latin American press is bad
, Very bad.
Now we are accused of dividing our countries, notice that
by chance, they said to Abraham Lincoln, considered
the best American president in history, they called him
tyrant, despot, fanatic, maddened by his noble struggle for abolition
of slavery. He provoked a civil war, which in case of defeat,
would have generated the division of the country and Lincoln would have
history as a criminal. Read what the media said
slave traders back then, let's learn some of the history.
Dear friends, dear friends, with the discovery of the
new continent, Latin America and North America practically
their story began at the same time. Have ever
asked why is Latin America not the United States the country
most powerful on the planet and vice versa? This is one of the most
great enigmas of development. The answers are multiple and
complex, but certainly one of those answers is the kind of
elites that dominated and still dominate our America. If only
Dear President Obama, let it be understood that by defending your
interests or misinformation you support those elites who
so much damage has been done to us. All men are created
equal, they are endowed by their Creator with certain rights
inalienable among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
the happiness.
In Ecuador and throughout Latin America we also support these
principles and we will make them come true at any cost and not just for
the elites at some future time but now and for everyone.
Prosperity with equity, I would say, equity for prosperity but
also sovereignty and dignity.
The time has come for the second and final independence for
our America.
Many thanks.