We are all made from the same Ecuador.
We are all made from the same Ecuador.
We share air and oxygen with our brothers. We share
the elements of all nature.
Little by little we become each other. The destiny of the human being and
nature is ineluctably ours.
two
The traveling poet, Walt Whitman, said:
every atom in my body is yours too.
We are all made of this same fertile clay, of his music, of
the landscapes of him.
All of his people: Montubia, mestizo, indigenous, Afro-Ecuadorian.
Yes, we are all made from the same Ecuador!

We are one and we are all. We are diverse. We come from the same
history: the one taught in the classrooms and that other, told by word of mouth
mouth, heart to heart, from grandparents to grandchildren, from parent to child, from
talk among neighbors, friend to friend.
We live in the triumphant town of the Pichincha deed that gave us the
independence. And that - to a great extent - was victorious thanks to the
dedication and solidarity of this people of which we are part.
There they were: the indomitable Yaguachi battalion, the bravery of the Paya, the
tenacity of Albión, Magdalena and the Grenadiers of the Andes; the
delivery of Lancers, Hunters, Dragons ... some of them almost children,
all from here, many from abroad ... from sister America.
And there were heroes and heroines that historiography does not collect.
These heroes came from Manuela Espejo, mentor, pioneer and hero of
all this libertarian deed, incendiary and passionate writer, seeker
tenacious of justice and equity, but - above all - in solidarity with the
most abandoned, with the most excluded, with the most marginalized.
Lucas Tipán was there, patriot, chasqui, courier and spy.
Disarmed and exposed to danger, there were also our
famous guarichas, true generals from the backstage and rear.
They were seed and today we are the fruit of that solidarity. We follow her
maintaining and recreating in our daily heroes, in our
heroines on foot.
Today I greet all of them and all of you, my brother people. Greetings to
the National Assembly that today welcomes us into its home, which is everyone's
Ecuadorians.
I greet the presence of the dear Heads of State, Vice Presidents and
the international delegations that accompany us.

I greet our esteemed national and international guests.
In a special way to Rocío, my wife, tireless companion.

To my daughters and sons in law, to my beloved grandchildren. Thanks for your support
always.

I greet my dear family, my father.

To my dear mother-in-law and my beloved mother, who surely from the
heaven is watching us ...

I said, to my beloved mother who is watching us from heaven and that
she will surely be as scared as me.

Good morning and thank you very much for joining us today, when the
inheritance of the past with the present and the future that we are
building for ten years.
4

Today is ending an era that leaves the country with more realities and objectives.
clear:
Ten years of education and health.
To deliver a new educational institution every 12 days and a
medical infrastructure every 10 days.

A decade in which we forged the foundations to live with clean energy and
own, mainly thanks to the management of the dear friend
Vice President of the Republic, Jorge Glas.

They are ten years of having witnessed the construction of roads,
bridges, ports and airports, of multipurpose projects.
Ten years of recovering self-esteem, pride and sense of
belonging to Ecuadorians.

And much, much more.
This process has an entire town and has a name: Revolution
Citizen

The people make history, but the leaders accelerate the processes. Is
Revolution has a leader: Rafael Correa Delgado.

Thanks Rafael. Goodbye, dear brother, Rafael Correa Delgado.

5
This process also has a legend: that of the Citizen Revolution.
Someday — and listen to me carefully — we will be able to proudly narrate to our
children and grandchildren. Tell them that we were eyewitnesses to that legend.
Even more: that we were part of it with determination.

That like more than 100 years ago there were those who rode alongside the
General Eloy Alfaro, now we can say that we ride - well ...
some of us shot — with Rafael Correa Delgado.

Already Pepe (José Serrano, president of the National Assembly) made a
quite complete description of the entire work, of all the actions and the
reinstitutionalization of the State by this revolution. I'm not going
to repeat.
He said: we were and are worthy heirs of those heroes of August, of
October, July, November, May ...
I thank the Ecuadorian people for having trusted in this process of
change. Thanks to Alianza PAÍS and all the groups, organizations,
colleagues who made this day possible, which is not for
my. It belongs to everyone.

I also thank in a special way my friend and colleague for
vice president Jorge Glas Espinel.

And to his beloved family, who were always by our side.
I thank all those who were present at the polls: those who
voted for us, those who voted for other candidates and those who
They chose their right to annul their vote or to vote blank.
They all strengthened democracy.
They all have my respect and my openness.

Everyone, absolutely everyone, will be part of an inescapable dialogue
national, deeply enriching.
A stage has concluded that, like everything else, has successes and errors. Y
another begins that may be more difficult, because we must not only strengthen
achievements, but improve them.
Nobody doubts that today we have a different Ecuador! And neither of
that there is still much, much to do!
From today, the future.
I am the President of all.
I owe myself to everyone.
I respect everyone.

I will work so that no one, absolutely no one, is left behind.
A LIFETIME - MISSION TENDURA
Dear compatriots,
The future does not wait. We said it: the future is now.
During the time that we have been together here there will already be new
citizens of the future. From this moment they are already ours
concern and the first recipients of our task.
7
Because the future is now.
We want a responsible country and government. Let them worry about their
citizens a lifetime.
Yes. A lifetime.
Like that endearing bolero by Farrés, sung by Los Panchos: “Toda
a life". From the moment of conception to when
God decides to close our eyes.
Even a little further.
A lifetime.
Starting with the Tenderness Mission:
With prenatal care of the mother and baby as stimulation
prenatal and proper diet.
With an institutionalized delivery, medical care, vaccinations and screening
neonatal that - as you may recall - began in the Mission
Manuela Espejo and that allows timely diagnosis and treatment
very serious alterations.
We will reduce child malnutrition, the only Millennium Goal that
Ecuador could not comply. In everything else we completely overcome
those goals.

Then will come early stimulation, vaccination plans, care
integral. And stimulate that other birth, the one Savater calls the
"Social birth", that of symbolic thought, that of words.
From the first steps instill values, instill love for science,
love for knowledge, for technology, for sport, not only
as a physical culture but as a way to strengthen the will.
8
Instill a love for art. From an early age the ability to
differentiate flavors, aromas, textures, colors, rhythms, shapes and
movements.
So that in the future all this is one of his hobbies. A passion that
make you feel comfortable with yourself, without having to resort to substances
strange for it.

A LIFETIME - YOUNG IMPULSE
We have called the second stage Young Impulse. In her
It corresponds to immerse yourself in the deep science that frees from taboos,
of superstitions, of undesirable myths and that teaches to control the
nature for the benefit of human beings and for the benefit of their own
nature, its conservation and its good to take advantage of it.
That the young person learn to properly conceptualize so that they
make it easy to explain things and understand phenomena. And that he acquires
eloquence in science.
That he learn to use the precise method or that - if necessary -
develop your own methodologies. That he be inclined for the investigation, that
seek to unravel the laws of nature, society and the
thought that liberates the human being and liberates the spirit from him.
Do not deny our young people the possibility of pursuing the careers of their
dreams ...
But - at the same time - protecting the quality and excellence that the
university education to train professionals satisfied with their
profession and that can be useful to society.
For this we will create preparatory courses in order to equate
knowledge, because we know that there are still differences between
various institutions, but above all between the countryside and the city.
9
Yes. Young Impulse. Granting our young people easy credit and
opportune that allows them to convert their aptitudes and potentialities, their
knowledge, skills and abilities, in an enterprise.
We are a country of entrepreneurs. Sometimes you just lack the opportunity.
Easy credits so that they do not have to go to institutions
who ask them about their credit history, who ask them about
their properties that — needless to say — they do not possess.
Guide and train them in basic management techniques and in
skills to negotiate the product or service. So they will offer it later
more and more in greater quantity and with better quality.
Let us trust our young people. They are present from the Homeland.
Let's help them to be their future too.

Let's not stigmatize its possible failure. Let's show them that the real
failure is not trying. What if after trying it fails,
you are always more likely the next time the result
be much better.
Let's not demonize failure.
In other countries, whoever fails always has the right to start from
new and more likely to be successful.
At this stage we will continue to reinforce the love for art, development
sports and, above all, training in values.
Values ​​such as honesty, transparency, respect for others and
by the authorities, loyalty to the fatherland, solidarity, tolerance,
own domain.

If values ​​are not instilled from an early age, then it is expensive - and
sometimes impossible— socially, economically and humanly to provide solutions.
10
That is why we will wage a relentless fight against the micro-trafficking of
drugs in neighborhoods, schools and colleges.

If necessary, we will decree a national emergency for this.
It is imperative to stop this attempt on the lives of children and
teenagers.
We cannot allow the future of our children to be mutilated.

We want —in addition— for them, families strengthened, restored.
That responsible parenthood is not only recognizing the children but also
maintain them, take care of them, raise them, train them and - above all and above all -
love them.
Because the family is the foundation and scaffolding of society, we will improve
our ability to work together with her to attend to
completely and comprehensively addiction problems, the dramatic
bullying, suicides, computer crimes, disorders
eating habits, consumerism, early pregnancy, depression and low
self esteem...
We will not allow an attempt on the lives of our children. The
we want happy, healthy, creative, critical, magical, safe, active,
intelligent, taking the world ahead ... This is how we want our
children.

Within the ALL A LIFETIME Plan, we want a society that cares for
its citizens giving them physical security, with employment, with institutions
health, with social security that - by constitutional mandate - must
be universal. With equality, with equity, with recreation, with culture.
Satisfying all of this is the first step toward a fulfilling life.
eleven

And, on the other hand, priority attention to those who require it, such as
people with some kind of disability and those with illnesses
catastrophic or terminal. Much attention to them.

In A Lifetime, we will place special emphasis on our siblings in
condition of extreme poverty, for whom we will consider raising the
bonus up to $ 150 per month.
Please make it clear: up to $ 150 a month. So it was ours
campaign promise.
And this according to the number of family members or people
with disabilities or the number of older adults living with them.
Someone will say paternalism. It would be if the voucher was not delivered to
promote micro-enterprise projects that allow them to leave
of poverty. That is the purpose: to get out of extreme poverty, to eliminate
extreme poverty.

As we already did from the Vice Presidency with the Manuela Mission
Mirror, we will triple that mission with Las Manuelas and Las Joaquinas, which
they have already started work.

Those missions will be with abandoned mothers, with women
violated, with orphaned children. They will stand up to violence,
early pregnancies, to the exclusion of women.
The world owes a debt to women, who are half the
humanity, but at the same time they are the mothers of the other half!
12

And we will shout with them:
Not one less!
Not one less!

And something special: I believe that a government has not only the obligation
to give free health and education ...
Yes, there are those who believe - and I respect that - that the only thing a government should
Giving is education, health and care for people in a state of
helplessness.
I believe that it is also the obligation of a government to provide housing.

If a bird has a nest, a rabbit a burrow, a wolf a
lair ... How can it be possible that in a dignified society a being
human has no home! How can it be possible!

The own house consolidates the image of a small family patrimony.
We married people know that the first thing wives demand of us is:
"When do we buy a house?" Therefore, the handcuffs -
primarily — you have the feeling that a home of your own helps
unity and for that family unity to last.
We will build for this - oh, what a tough challenge! - 325 thousand homes.

Of which, 191 thousand will be delivered free of charge to families in
extreme poverty. And the rest will be destined to those who have
a minimal ability to pay.
13

With this we will not only give that immense satisfaction to the families
poor, but - in addition - we will boost the economy, because
generate direct jobs among builders, workers, carpenters,
electricians, potters, glaziers, plumbers, fabricators, locksmiths,
ironmongers and small merchants.
In this way we will be able to generate no less than 136 thousand new jobs.

A WHOLE LIFE - MY BEST YEARS
And another big debt:
We are a society that with unusual frequency "files" the
elders after they have served us well. So says Joan Manuel
Serrat.
We must recover intra-family solidarity, but at the same time the Government
and the country - responsibly - must guarantee care
gerontological, health, recreation ...
And for those older adults in a defenseless state, it will be granted
a monthly pension and social security at no cost.

Obviously - and that's where we all go - when God decides to close us
the eyes, a dignified burial without costing a single penny.
Debts cannot be carried until after death.

We have called this part of the mission A whole life My Best
Years. Because that's the way it should be. The best years, so that when you return to see
and look at everything that has been done, there is in them the satisfaction of duty
compliment.
14
But they still have a lot to convey: the awareness that their task
follow. We must still teach values ​​to children, grandchildren and young people, such as
they did it with us. The story the teachers have read, they read it
they have lived.
Yes, a lifetime, because life is the opportunity we have to
exist, to have dreams, but above all to make them come true.
PRODUCTION AND ECONOMY
Friends and friends:
If the ultimate goal of the economy is the well-being of the human being, it is
Through work we can realize wishes and desires.
It is ironic that in a country with so much wealth and so mega-diverse,
unemployment still exists.
With so much potential and so much wealth:
We have so much land that demands to be better cultivated, so many
products to transform and industrialize, so much child to educate, so much
Grandpa what to take care of ...
How can there be unemployment in such a country!
The capacity, creativity and innovation of our
people and so is his whole spirit of work and entrepreneurship.
We offered and we will promote a great National Agricultural Minga.

We will reinforce the goal of returning sight to the field and pay for that
another huge historical debt.

fifteen
With the RENOVA plan we will scrap the tools of our
farmers. We will change them for new ones so that they can produce
more and better.
We will provide credits for equipment and machinery in the best
conditions for our peasants and for the medium and large
producers.
We will create schools of excellence close to the communities, so that
the children do not have to walk so much, that they do not arrive tired
study, to facilitate study and access to research.

We will work to improve transportation that provides facilities for
productive chains and distribution networks. And we will
also with rural school transport.

We will dedicate a lot of effort to designing curricular meshes, we will create
agricultural technical universities and we will provide the services
essential essentials. All this adapted to the reality of each area.
It is about improving the quality of life in the countryside so that young people
do not have to leave it to study.
We will return our view to the field because it was always the love of
our productive capacity.

We are going to produce - and produce better - to satisfy our
needs, first, and to become large exporters
too.
Let's remember. We are world leaders in at least 5 products.
We have:
The tastiest banana in the world.
16
The best fine aroma cocoa on the planet.
The most beautiful roses from all continents.
The richest tuna that can be found.
The best textured shrimp of all seas.
But we cannot only export raw materials. No one has come out
out of poverty by exporting only raw materials. If we already have
consolidated markets, it is necessary to give them the respective added value.

Let's consolidate the change in the productive matrix, as we have done
with the energetic, right, Jorge? (to Vice President Glas).

We are going to make the world fall in love with our beautiful and diverse country. From
our exuberant jungle, of the imposing Andes, of those cities
heritage of humanity, our infinite beaches and our
Enchanted islands.
From our Guayaquil, from our Manta, from our Portoviejo, from
our Esmeraldas. We are going to make you fall in love with our country!

But above all of the most valuable wealth that we have: hospitality,
the kindness of our mestizo, Montubia, indigenous and Afro people—
Ecuadorian.
We are going to bring - and attract - millions of new tourists.
And we will await - of course - all with open arms.

We will form a Tax Productive Advisory Council to establish
the bases of a joint work between the public and the private.

17
We will respect the agreement signed with the productive sector.
But nothing can take shape without joint responsibility between the government,
financial institutions, the productive sector, workers and the
population.

Ecuador deserves that shared responsibility.
Ecuador needs to multiply production and employment.
For my part, I promise to deliver in 2021 a country with
better results internally and externally.

As I offered it in campaign: I will sign an Executive Decree of austerity
in government.

Everything - all spending, all investment - will pass through an objective filter of
citizen needs.

We are going to sustain dollarization.
I repeat: we are going to support dollarization.
For this, we will promote all the policies and activities that allow
add dollars to the country.
We will not have a parallel currency.

We will always seek to improve the conditions of terms and interests with
those that we have financed and are going to finance our development.
18
The economy must be at the service of the human being and respect life and
environment. That is why production has to take care of nature.
We will be responsible for our big house, that big house that is the
planet Earth.

FOREIGN POLICY
Ecuadorians and Ecuadorians:
We will strengthen and refresh our strategic insertion in the
world. We will increase trust. We have the products
necessary to be exporters of high quality goods and services.
We will strengthen regional integration and support initiatives and
spaces that enhance it, especially the Andean Community, the
Unasur and Celac.

Simón Bolívar was not wrong when he announced: “The unity of our
peoples is not a mere chimera of men, but an inexorable decree
of destiny".
We will contribute to the construction of peace and the peaceful solution of the
conflicts and controversies.
Colombian brothers; dear brother Juan Manuel Santos:
We will continue to support the peace talks between the Government of
brother country of Colombia and the Army of National Liberation.

We will promote south-south cooperation.
We will respond to the environmental crisis and climate change.
19
We will work for tax justice and to transform the relationship between
states and transnational companies to comply with their
environmental, labor and human rights obligations.

We will promote exports and their diversification by supporting not only
large exporters but also small producers, to
that the popular and solidarity economy produce more and better and expand its
access to international markets.

We will promote green diplomacy and - as Amazonian president that
I am— I will promote a regional process of protection and zealous care of
the Amazon to conserve the largest river basin in the world.

Our foreign policy would be truncated without the defense and protection of
our migrants.

We will guarantee - demand - your rights abroad and equally
way when you decide to return to the country, always, dear brothers
migrants, we will welcome them with open arms.

DIALOGUE
Compatriots:
Those who have worked with me know that always, on all occasions and
When in doubt, I go to dialogue and seek consensus.
The concept of truth changes with time and circumstances. But
If so, the Sun would still continue to rotate around the Earth.
twenty
The absolute truth is unattainable. It is always better to appeal to the
multiple rationality: a set of human beings knowledgeable about the
subject, they provide their best advice. Intelligent beings that
are in direct contact with the problem and its possible solutions. Yes,
They provide their best advice. This is how I learned it since I was a child.
In my public life I have recognized that constructive criticism and
respectful opposition have allowed me to have advisers ad
honorem helpful.

That is the style of which I speak: dialogue, not debate.
The debate seeks to disqualify the concepts of the opposite, although
they were successful; and —on more than one occasion— denigrate the contrary.
The debate only satisfies the ego, it does not try to find solutions.
Mario Benedetti used to say that the secret to a lasting relationship is
dialogue between differences.
In the dialogue, concepts are provided mutually. That is why I reiterate:
Dialogue is not the end but the way to include diversity and understand it.
It is about adding elements that each time allow us to get closer
more to some concept of truth.
We are going to dialogue. Let's all learn to attend, understand and even
—As it happens to us in marriage— to decode ...

If the wife says “nothing is wrong with me”… withdraw a little. But if she comes back
to say "nothing's wrong" ... Run away!
You have to learn to decode the messages, but above all to include
the others, to the different ones, to the contrary opinions.
twenty-one
How it enriches the dialogue!
We will all arrive at dialogue with a free spirit, with an open mind, without
preconceived ideas, willing to compromise. Because that's what the
dialogue. Dialogue is not all or nothing. The dialogue is not “if they don't
this… absolutely nothing ”.
No. For dialogue, we must all approach with the intention of yielding
spaces. That is dialogue.
We will reach a dialogue based on the great national objectives
all with a heart empty of prejudices and resentments.
If we do not dialogue, we will never be able to meet the needs of each
Ecuadorian.
I have already spoken with several groups of diverse origins, tendencies and
sectors. Much of the agreements and suggestions are already included in
our government program and, if necessary, we will change them.
Only with dialogue will we achieve a participatory, committed Ecuador,
responsible, inclusive and honest
But above all, may he live in peace.
That is why constructive criticism and opposition are so necessary
respectful.
I issued invitations for this day to all the presidential candidates of
the last elections. I appreciate the presence of those who accepted the
invitation.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Dialogue as a method and culture of life leads us to great
conclusions. For example:
22
There can be no dialogue without freedom of expression. She is the soul of a
town. We find freedom of expression in his humor, in his art, in
your criticism.

Freedom of the press must be evidenced by media whose
content have quality and height.
The relationship with the media will be - as it has always been
been with me — fresh, fluid, and engaging.
I hope that they are carriers of the citizen's desire and, if they are, they
I assure that they will find a safe harbor in the government.

That —together— we can build the Ecuador that our brothers and sisters
sisters want and deserve.
STYLE
To carry out the dialogue requires leadership. Mine has its own
style.
For example, I am not academically inclined; rather I am a
conversationalist attached to conclusions, glad to go soon to the
synthesis, to the summary. That is why I will not do the Weekly Link.

Thank you Rafael for the part of that Link which was a course in Ecuador
from which Ecuadorians and I learned a lot about our country.
We will find another way to do it.
But, as mandated by the constitution, I will keep the
citizenship in a truthful and timely manner on all management
government, which will be completely transparent.

23
On the other hand, if it were a matter of choosing, I prefer systems such as
some European countries where the figure of the president passes almost
unnoticed.
The citizens there are generally satisfied with the action of their
government.
And if they are not, they come as many and as many times as necessary to
express their will and decide with their vote the changes that are required.
There everything seems to work well that way, because everyone does what
that is up to him, and he does it well. We are going to see to it that it is so.
That is the leadership I prefer.

Lao Tzu said that to be in front of the people one must always go
behind the village.
In this regard there is an anecdote of General Carlos Soublette, twice
President of Venezuela. Soublette learned that there was a work of
theater in which he ridiculed it. He called the author of the play and said:
- Look sir, I know that you are doing a play
 loves “Exc í m S ñ r” (I don't know if ‘that very slow’ or ‘is the
very slow ') and who laughs at me.
- Yes, Mr. President, said the author of the play to Soublette.
- Son, could you see her?
- Nice to meet you, Mr. President.
They presented the play and in it Soublette laughed a lot. He did not object to her or
he vetoed, to the astonishment of the author, that he said:
Mr. President, can we present this play in which people laugh
from you?
Soublette replied:
24
The Republic will not be lost because the people laugh at a ruler; I know
he will lose when the ruler laughs at his people.

CORRUPTION
When it comes to corruption, our fight will be relentless.

We are going to perform a major surgery on corruption.
When we start to believe that the me matters more than the you, we are
entering the rugged realm of corruption.
We will fight corruption: that of now and yesterday, and that which could
come. The inside and the outside.
That is why we have demanded - from Odebrecht, the North American justice, the
Brazilian justice - that they give us the complete list of the corrupt.
Those of yesterday and those of now.
It cannot be that, blessed by the passage of time, already when they pass
political trends, come back as great financiers ...

Come back as great entrepreneurs, as great investors,
blessed - I emphasize - by the passage of time.
And even, sometimes, as candidates - sometimes - to give advice on
how politics and justice should be carried out.

The corruption…
25
And here I take a few phrases that some time I found in the Kymalion,
this book of dialectics supposedly written by Hermes Trimegisto -
eight thousand years ago, they say— the one who was later converted and
prostituted as "Mercury."
Corruption, says Hermes Trimegistus, I paraphrase what he said in
truth: it's like a room full of darkness. For this to end, no
you have to remove the darkness, you have to introduce light, fill it with light.
Giving light to the darkness is an independent judicial investigation and
transparent.

It is sanction and not impunity.
It is transparent public procurement.
It is ethical training for our children, youth and adults.

Juan Montalvo said: “I am not an enemy of individuals or classes
social. Where the corruption is, there is my enemy ”.
We will fight corruption.
I call on all the control authorities to, together with the
citizenship and the support of the United Nations,
let us constitute a national front to fight corruption.
We will constitute a public and private national front to combat
corruption.

Let's make a firm commitment to co-responsibility:
We do not want the children of today to listen to the new
President saying the same thing on the day of his inauguration and promising, a
Again, that corruption will not happen!
26

DEMOCRACY AND PUBLIC MANAGEMENT
Regarding the same topic of the dialogue.
When the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the delegates of countries and
UN experts met in long discussion sessions of the
articulated and writing of the topics.
People with disabilities broke into these sessions to
explain that, if they did not take them into account actively and
participatory, the Convention would have neither the scope nor the character
universal and binding yearned for.
Once they were given the decisive and central role they deserved, the
Convention marked a milestone in issues of justice, equity, social policy,
inclusion and participation.
That fight raised the motto "Nothing about us, without us"

This summarizes - magisterially - how it should be legislated and how it should be
a policy of full inclusion.
This is how the next Ecuadorian Government will act.
Nothing about the citizens, without the citizens.

Nothing about the citizens, without the citizens.
We will not make decisions about our nationalities, their rights,
their wishes, their demands, without dialogue with their colleagues
indigenous people, Montubios and Afro-descendants. With everyone.

27
We will not undertake in public-private processes nor will we
concession of work to private companies, without the presence of
businessmen.
We will not act on agricultural or fishing issues, without the
participation of farmers, rice growers, banana growers, fishermen,
farmers, large, medium or small.
We will not deal with labor issues, without the active participation of
workers and their organizations.

Ecuadorians:
We will respect the labor rights enshrined in the Constitution and
in international treaties.
There will be no policy or law proposal, without prior dialogue with the
Civil society organizations. And that many and how many come
times it is necessary - I say it again - to deposit with your vote the
sovereign will of this people.

Because they are human work, the laws are perfectible and none is written in
stone. It will be the respective instances and the Ecuadorian people who,
democratically determine your own future. Our own
destination.
No action or decision will be made about our military, without
count on their presence and without listening to their criteria.
We will not discuss gender issues, without knowing the proposals of the
women's organizations and the GLBTI community.
We will not be able to understand the reality of the elderly, their needs,
without including them in the preparation of laws and program design.
28
We will not approve or veto codes or laws, without dialogue with the
directly involved: doctors, teachers, builders,
heirs. We will have a dialogue with them first.
Nothing about teachers, without those whose vocation is teaching and learning.
training.
Nothing about the artisans, without talking to them who work with the
hands from the heart, the spirit and its cultural tradition.
Nothing about the peasants, the youth, the public servants, the
migrants ... without the peasants, the youth, the public servants, the
migrants.

This is how I understand participatory democracy and that is how I will proceed.
And that's how I conceive of public management: nothing about citizens, without
citizens.
WHAT I EXPECT FROM YOU
Dear inhabitants, compatriots of this beautiful country:
These are my commitments. Now you will hear what I expect from
your. We have talked about stewardship.

I know that this is not the time to put figures, but everything is
analyzed and planned.
But just as dialogue is a back-and-forth exercise,
Stewardship requires a commitment from you as well.
We are all responsible - to a greater or lesser extent - for what we
it happens to any citizen in the country. It is time to stop acting
as victims ...

29
It is time to stop acting like victims. It's time to do something
to change reality.
Friends and friends, we are designed to change. Biological,
anatomically, physiologically; psychologically, spiritually, we are
designed to change. All the moments of the day, of life,
we are exchanging elements with nature and with others
Humans. Sooner or later we even become
atomically in each of them.
We are designed to change. And what better to change a spirit for
form a whole. A whole, absolutely always ready to
change.
Sometimes we ask a politician, "Excuse me, but you yesterday
I thought otherwise ”.
I would like to remind you of the phrase of the economist John Maynard Keynes - there
around the time of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's New Deal — when a
journalist asked him: Forgive me Mr. Keynes but you a year ago
I thought differently. And he replied: Yes sir, because when I
wrong change of mind. What do you do?

Unfortunately we have learned that it cannot be changed. And come on
listening around proverbs, sayings that say "Tree that is born
twisted, his trunk never straightens "or" Genius and figure, until the
grave".
Is not true! We are designed to change and we must!
every day of life!

To improve, of course. Not to make matters worse. To improve in the
training, in the dissemination of values.
30
That is why it is important to say what I expect from you, compatriots
dear.
What do I expect from you:
The main and most important thing - I look forward to your joy. That the good humor that
It characterizes us not to be overshadowed by the problems of everyday life.
That in the face of discontent there is the proposal and active participation,
respectful, supportive, friend.
Do not allow disputes that cause us so much harm to flourish. Hatred
it hurts and causes pain. It is not true that hatred does more harm to the other. The
I hate the only one who hurts is the one who professes it.

I hope that every Ecuadorian feels proud of being one and that is why
he prefers what we produce here.

And for that pride to be real, I hope that the producer does not lower costs
of production decreasing quality, but strives to deliver to
his compatriots the best product, the best service.
That his interest is not only to sell but to satisfy his client, who is his
his brother.
But the producer will not be able to do it without financial entities really
committed to the development of the country and who ensure to offer
achievable agreements.
We want a productive sector aware of its duties and
obligations. Understand that the size and profits of your
businesses are in direct proportion to well-being and tranquility
of your employees.
Nobody works better than a calm person.
31
Nobody works better than a happy person.
Stephen Hawking once told me that it is time to change
conception of existence; that until now we have lived with the mechanics
Newton's classic and that it is time to start thinking now with the new
scientific physical concepts of relativity and quantum mechanics; that
you have to start thinking about those things that go beyond the
speed of light and that on more than one occasion baffle us, for
that which seems inaccessible.
That is why it is necessary for our entrepreneurs to understand that their
labor is one of the pillars that sustains the harmony and well-being of
million families.
To think relatively and quantum is to think more about others than
in oneself.

There is a quantum foundation for it, at some point there may be
time to talk about it.
And please, dear businessmen, dear politicians:
Let's not make the mistake of speaking ill of our country abroad!

We are doing harakiri ourselves.
Speak well of our country. It is true that there is still much to
change. It is true that this government and previous ones have had
huge mistakes. But here is what is built with mistakes and successes.
You have to speak well of the country!

32
And we as a Government are going to contribute to finding the
justification for it:
We want a country full of honest merchants who pay their
imposed with absolute confidence that those resources will be well
used for the benefit of all.
We want citizens who are responsible, punctual at the time of
meet your tax obligations.
We want young people with infinite dreams whose main concern is
study every day more. "Learn to learn" said Lenin; the big one…
it is not this one.

Learn to learn - Lenin said - to better understand and better
Act.
There is no better way to earth an idea than through social practice. Yes
in social practice, the veracity, the certainty of a
theory, that theory does not work.
Someone said that it is time to leave ideologies behind. It is possible that
Yes. We are going to change the order: now we are going to build the
ideology; that it is not the ideology that marks us. Us
we will build in social practice the ideology that will come to the
future.

What is my ideology?
Ecuador, to the Ecuadorian. The equator.

We want public officials aware of the honor that means
be able to serve your compatriots.
33

Not just because they get paid. You have to deliver quality -
learn, train, get technical— and warmth.
With affection, with affection, with kindness, with tolerance, with respect.
But, that's back and forth. As much as in the trade, in the business,
between the person who sells and the client, here it is between the person who provides the
service and the one who receives it.
Also the one who receives the service has the obligation to provide warmth,
kindness, respect and tolerance for public servants

We also want international officials who take pride in
represent us outside our borders. That your work always
keep up the name of Ecuador. That highlight our image
of progress and sovereignty. That they sell investment, tourism and
products of his country, the well-being of Ecuadorians.
We want a public force that works for the common good in the
protection of citizens and in their national surveillance tasks.
We want uniformed citizens united to national causes and to the
Constitution.
We want a responsible communication media with the country. That
understand that a job badly done by them, that a bad
intention, they can destroy honest citizens and society.

We want columnists, editors, journalists of integrity who write with
the light of truth and not the shadow of hatred. The journalist must demand
justice, not revenge.
3. 4
We want union and political leaders who think about the
needs and urgencies that our country has in all sectors of the
coexist socially.
I make a fervent and affectionate appeal to all of them so that in this
new stage that we start today, think about your represented and -
when appropriate — rectify your attitudes. We are designed to
change.
We want — and we need — a lucid political opposition. Dialogue.
Prudent. Tall and of deep mutual respect.
That kind of opposition is necessary, it is healthy.
We want citizens to be masters of their memories, of their
thoughts, his habits, his words. Masters and not slaves of
they.
We want all Ecuadorians - men and women, youth and
adults, uniformed and civilians, students and professionals, montubios,
indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorians - let's unite, dialogue and —together—
Let us take the helm, the weld and the plow of this country of ours.

FIRED
During the campaign - and before it - I said I had my hand
extended to all.
From now on, as your President, I will not only have my hand extended
but —in addition— my open arms so that we can all embrace:
Warmly.
Honestly.
To be honest.
And above all in solidarity.
35
For all this, I repeat with Monsignor Leonidas Proaño:
Welcome fighters of peace and life!

Welcome fighters for peace and life, said Monsignor Proaño!

Welcome fighters of peace and life! And they are and will be every
much more day!
My always fraternal embrace, dear Ecuadorians, dear
Ecuadorians.
Many thanks.

LENÍN MORENO GA